PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(1) 
 
 
 
ISLAMABAD, SATURDAY, DECEMBER 5, 2020 
PART II 
 
Statutory Notifications (S. R. O.) 
 
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN 
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION OF PAKISTAN 
 
NOTIFICATION 
 
Islamabad, the 3rd December, 2020 
 
 S. R. O. 1304 (I)/2020.—In exercise of the pow ers conferred by sub-
section (3) of section 167 of Insurance Ordinance, 2000 (XXXIX of 2000) read 
with clause (ii) of sub -section (1) of section 40 and clause (u) of sub -section (4) 
of section 20 of the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan Act, 1 997 
(XLII of 1997), the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan, with the 
approval of the Policy Board, is pleased to make the following regulations, the 
same having been previously published in the official Gazette through 
S.R.O. 343(I)/2020 dated April 28, 2020. 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
PRELIMINARY 
 
 1. Short title, commencement and applicability. —(1) These 
Regulations may be called the Corporate Insurance Agents Regulations, 2020. 
 
 (2) They shall come into force at once. 
 
 
2741 (1—43) 
 
Price: Rs. 60.00 
 
[6475(2020)/Ex.Gaz.] 
 
2741(2) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (3) These Regulations are applicable to all corporate insurance agents 
of life and non -life insurers including the family and general takaful operator s. 
The relevant provisions of these Regulations are also applicable to the 
distribution of insurance through technology based distribution channels. 
 
 (4) These Regulations shall be applicable on all new insurance business 
written on or after J uly 1, 2021 by insurers under their agency agreements with 
corporate insurance agents. The insurer an d the corporate insurance agent shall 
make amendments in the existing agency agreements, wherever necessary , to 
comply with these Regulations no later than June 30, 2021. The insurer shall 
send a written confirmation, signed by the designated insurance exe cutive, to the 
Commission mentioning that the necessary changes have been completed and the 
relationship with the corporate insurance agent(s) complies with the requirements 
or these Regulations. 
 
 2. Definitions.—(1) In these Regulations, unless there is anything 
repugnant in the subject or context,— 
 
 (a) ―annexure‖ means annexures appended to these Regulations; 
 
 (b) ―agency agreement ‖ called by whatsoever name or title, means a 
legal contract between the corporate insurance agent and the 
insurer, under which, the former acts as the corporate insurance 
agent of the la tter, meeting all the requirements of the applicable 
provisions of the Ordinance, Insurance Rules and these 
Regulations; 
 
 (c) ―bancassurance‖ means the offering , advertising, distributing, 
selling and/or marketing of insurance products by a bank licensed 
by State Bank of Pakistan to their account holders / customers / 
general public through their sales and distribution channels 
including but not limited to branches, telemarketing centres, 
websites or any digital platform etc. by virtue of agency 
agreement(s) between the insurer and the bank; 
 
 (d) ―bank‖ fur the purpose or these regulations, includes,— 
 
 (i) a ―banking company‖ as defined in clause (vii) of section 2 of 
the Ordinance; or 
 
 (ii) a ―scheduled bank‖ as defined in clause (lvii) of section 2 of 
the Ordinance; or 
 
 (iii) any other institution or organisation directly or indirectly 
regulated by the State Bank of Pakistan; 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(3) 
 
 (e) ―bank insurance executive ‖ means an employee of the bank , by 
whatever name, title or designati on called , directly or indirectly 
responsible for managing the bancassurance arrangement for the 
bank who shall comply with the requirements imposed through 
these regulations; 
 
 (f) ―certification‖ means the process bv which a specified person is 
issued a certificate by the insurer entitling him to solicit and 
procure insurance business on behalf of the Insurer unde r the 
agency agreement: 
 
 Provided that in the case of banc assurance business, the 
certificate for ce rtification of specified person shall be issued 
jointly by the insurer and the bank; 
 
 (g) ―Commission‖ means the Securities and Fxchange Commission of 
Pakistan established under section 3 of the SECP Act 1997 (XLII of 
1997); 
 
 (h) ―corporate ins urance age nt‖ means all person s, excluding 
individuals, who have entered into agency agreement with any li fe 
or non -life insurer registered under the Ordinance and facilitate 
insurance products distribution for the insurer with which they have 
entered into an agency agreement; 
 
 (i) ―corporate insurance executive ‖ means an employee of the 
corporate insurance agents (excluding banks), by whatever name, 
title or designation called, directly or indirectly responsible for 
managing the arrangement for the corporate insurance agent who 
shall comply with the requirements imposed through these 
regulations; 
 
 (j) ―designated insurance executive ‖ means an employee or the 
insurer, called by whatever name, title or designation, directly or 
indirectly responsible for managing the business arrangement with 
the corporate insurance agent on behalf of the insurer; 
 
 (k) ―direct sales model ‖ in relation to business through corporate 
insurance agents means a particular distribution model where the 
corporate insurance agent uses its own s ales force to market and 
distribute insurance products through its network; 
 
 (l) ―group life insurance policies ‖ means a life insurance contract 
having a term not exceeding one year, offered on yearly renewable 
term and group underwriting_ basis through a master policy 
2741(4) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
document. The policyholder is a company, body corporate, bank, 
registered association or any enterprise. It excludes group life 
policies with cash values and individual life policies which may be 
sold to a group of individuals; 
 
 (m) ―insurer‖ means an insurance company registered under the 
Ordinance to carry on insurance business; 
 
 (n) ―insurance consultant ‖ in relation to business through corporate 
insurance agent means a specified person who is an employee of 
the insurer and is responsible for soliciting and procuring insurance 
business under the agency agreement; 
 
 (o) ―Insurance Rules ‖‗ means the Insuran ce Rules, 2017, and/or the 
Takaful Rules 2012 or any other rule(s) issued under the Ordinance; 
 
 (p) ―loyalty insurance product ‖ means t he products which are 
complimentary with any product or service and which policyholder 
becomes automatically entitled to insurance coverage upon meeting 
certain pre-specified conditions and for which, premium is not paid 
by the policyholder; 
 
 (q) ―misselling‖ means the deliberate, reckless, or negligent sale of 
insurance products in circumstances where a product sold is either 
misrepresented or unsuitable for the customer‘s needs; 
 
 (r) ―mobile network operators‖ means the corporate entities which are 
licensed by the Pakistan Telecommunication Authority to provide 
cellular mobile communication service under the applicable laws. 
 
 (s) ―Ordinance‖ means the I nsurance Ordinance, 2000 (XXXIX of 
2000); 
 
 (t) ―persistency‖ means the ratio of renewal year premiums collected 
in a calendar year to the premiums due in the same calendar year 
(the premiums due being inclusive or any increases as a result of a 
policy provision). The premium due in that calendar year shall 
include the premium in respect or policies discon tinued (lapsed or 
surrendered) dining that calendar year: 
 
 Provided that the renewal year premium received during the 
grace period provided in the insurance policies issued by the insurer 
or within a period of up to three months from the da te when t he 
renewal premium falls due, may be con sidered for the purpose of 
calculation of persistency; 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(5) 
 
 (u) ―policyholder‖ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under 
clause (xlvi) of section 2 of the Ordinance; 
 
 (v) ―protection products ‖ means insurance products, underwritten 
individually or on a group basis, with no element of savings or 
investments for the policyholder. This includes term li fe, personal 
accident, disability, health, critical illness and all non -life insurance 
products; 
 
 (w) ―referral model‖ in relation to business through corporate insurance 
agent means a p articular distribution model wher e the insurer uses 
its own insurance consultants to market and distribute insurance 
products through the distribution network or the corporate 
insurance agent based on sales leads generated by the corporate 
insurance agent; 
 
 (x) ―Regulations‖ means the Corporate Insuranec Agents Regulations, 
2020; 
 
 (y) ―savings products ‖ means regular premium individual life 
insurance products which have a savings or inverstment portion for 
the policyholder, being offered to an individual or a group of 
individuals. This includes investment linked unit linked policies, 
investment linked account value policies, universal li fe policies, 
and with/without profits convention al endowment and whole life 
plans; 
 
 (z) ―schedule‖ means schedule appended to these Regulations. 
 
 (aa) ―specified person ‖ means either an employee of the corporate 
insurance agent or an employee or the insurer w ho has u ndergone 
the required practical tra ining, examination, certification in respect 
of insurance products and the arrangement between the insurer and 
the corporate insurance agent, and who is responsible for soliciting 
and procuring insurance business for the insurer under the agency 
agreement. 
 
 (bb) ―technology based distribution channels ‖ means sale of insurance 
through channels involving technology, including but not limited 
to, mobile, internet or other te chnology based platforms etc. 
whether through involvement of corporate insurance agent s or 
otherwise. The technology provider may or may not be working in 
the capacity of corporate insurance agent; 
 
2741(6) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (cc) ―telemarketing‖ means sales of insurance products through 
recorded telephone lines; and 
 
 (dd) ―voluntary insurance product ‖ means the p roducts which 
policyholder opts to purchase with his own will and also pays the 
premium. 
 
 (2) All words and expressions used in these Regulations but not 
defined shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Ordinance and 
the Insurance Rules. 
 
 (3) In these Regulations, the word ―Takaful‖ may be used 
interchangeably with the word ‗insurance‘, ‗Family Taka ful‘ with ‗Life 
Insurance‘, ‗General Taka ful‘ with ‗Non-Life Insurance ‘, ‗contribution‘ with 
‗premium‘, ‗insured‘ with ‗policyholder‘ and ‗Company‘ & ‗Insurer‘ with 
‗Takaful Operator ‘, Similarly other terms used in the Takaful Rules, 2012 
associated with the Takaful business may be used interchangeably with their 
conventional counterpart words/terms. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
NATURE AND SCOPE OF ARRANGEMENTS FOR CORPORATE 
INSURANCE AGENTS 
 
 3. Basis of contract. —(1) The sale of all insurance products by any 
corporate insurance agent (on behalf of an Insurer) must be done in such a 
manner which demonstrates that the prospective purchaser makes an offer to 
enter i nto the insurance contract, and either the corporate insurance agent on 
behalf of the insurer signifies acceptance or the insure r directly signifies 
acceptance: 
 
 Provided that the of fer made under sub -regulation (1 ) shall he made 
either by signing a proposal form or in the case of telemarketing recording verbal 
consent or in the case of technology based channel consent obtained through 
acceptance of the policyholder on a secure web -based ―I agree ‖ or ―I accep t‖ 
button or any similar mechanism. 
 
 (2) Without the evidence of offer and acceptance, no insurance sale 
shall be deemed to be completed and the insurance contract shall be considered 
null and void. 
 
 (3) The role and function of the corporate insurance agent shall be 
subject to the provisions of Ordin ance including but not limited to eligibility, 
qualification and liability of insurance agents. 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(7) 
 
 4. Arrangement between insurer and corporate insurance 
agent.—(1) Any arrangement between insurer and the corporate insurance agent 
shall not be valid unless it incorporates the following compone nts in the agency 
agreement, namely,— 
 
 (a) It shall not contain any provisions which reduce in any way the 
liability or responsibility of the insurer towards the policyholder 
under the Ordinance and the Insurance Rules; 
 
 (b) It shall specify any functions w hich the insurer, as a part of such 
arrangement, intends to delegate to the corporate insurance agent; 
 
 (c) It shall clearly define the certification process which shall include a 
definition of the training required prior to certification; 
 
 (d) It contains a provision which clearly states the ―termination of 
agreement‖ clause and rights and obligation of the corporate 
insurance agent and the insurer subsequent to such termination and 
such clause shall also state th e treatment to be given to existing 
policyholders and remuneration to the corporate insurance agent 
subsequent to the termination; 
 
 (e) It contains a provision whereby the corporate insurance agent 
explicitly agrees to adhere to the provisions of these Re gulations 
and the provisions of the Ordinance in its capacity as an agent of 
the insurer; 
 
 (f) It contains a provision whereby the corporate insurance agent 
explicitly agrees that in case or dispute, the authorised 
ropresentative of the corporate insuranc e agent will appea r before 
the Insurance Tribunal, Federal Insurance Ombudsman and S mall 
Dispute Resolution Committees or the Waf aqi Mohtasib (where 
applicable): 
 
 Provided that the representation of the corporate insurance 
agent before the Insurance Tribunal, Federal Insurance Ombudsman 
and Small Dispute Resolution Committees or the Wafa qi Mohtasib 
(where applicable), shall strictly b e limited to its role in the sales 
and distribution of insurance products under the agency agreement 
and these Regulations. 
 
 (g) It contains provisions related to roles and responsibilities of the 
insurer and the corporate insurance agent in com pliance with the 
requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission of 
2741(8) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
Pakistan (Anti -Money Laundering and Countering Finan cing of 
Terrorism) Regulation, 2018 and other applicable laws in respect of 
Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism. 
 
 (2) In case where an insurance broker acts in the capacity of a 
corporate insurance agent or an administrative support provider or the services of 
a third -party administrator or of a mobile network operator arc involved, the 
agency agreement shall clearly stipulate the roles and responsibilities of each of 
the parties involved in respect of the following areas, at a minimum: 
 
 (a) policy acquisition/enrollment; 
 (b) administration and servicing; 
 (c) claims processing; and 
 (d) complaint handling. 
 
 5. Premium collection. —(1) The insurer may assign the 
responsibility of collecting premiums due on policies once issued, to the 
corporate insurance agent but before it does this, the Insurer shall ensure that the 
corporate insurance agent has in place the necessary premium collection system. 
 
 (2) Where the insurer is not satisfied with the capability of the 
corporate insurance agent to collect regular premiums and to effectively follow 
up on premiums due but not paid, the pre mium collection function shall be taken 
over by the insurer. 
 
 (3) The insurer shall also ensure that the premium collection system of 
the corporate insur ance agent is effectively working and, if it is not, shall take 
such action as is required to ensure that it is effective, including the withdrawal 
of the premium collection function from the corporate insurance agent. 
 
 (4) The corporate insurance agent s hall always pay the gross premium 
to the insurer and shall not retain any part of the insurance premium received 
from the policyholders for payment to the insurer. 
 
 (5) The corporate insurance agent and/or the insurer shall, with a view 
to conserve the in surance business already procured, make every attempt to 
ensure remittance of the premiums by the policyholders within the stipulated 
time, by notifying the policyholders orally and in writing, or through other means 
such as call centre, email o r SMS and t he insurer shall advise the corporate 
insurance agent of its desired level of business persistency from time to time and 
the corporate insurance agent shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure that its 
systems and processes are in place to meet these levels. 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(9) 
 
 (6) In the case of life Insurance, the insurer shall also ensure that 
notices under section 93 of the Ordinance are sent to the policyholders: 
 
 Provided that the insurer shall he allowed to transmit the notices under 
section 93 of the Ordinance to the policyholder through other technology based 
mediums, however, it shall be the responsibility of the insurer to satisfy the 
Commission, the Insurance Tribunal, the Federal Insurance Ombudsman and the 
Small Dispute Resolution Committees or the Wafaqi Mohtasib (where 
applicable), on demand , that the said notices were sent by the insurer and 
received by the policyholder. 
 
 (7) Any payment for premium made by the policyholder and received 
by the corporate insurance agent shall be deemed to constitute payment to the 
Insurer, 
 
 (8) The policyholder shall have a right to pay premium to the insurer 
through any means legally permitted in respect of the policies purchased through 
a corporate insurance agent. 
 
 (9) In the case of bancassurance business, the option o f premium 
deduction through direct debit shall be at the written consent of the policyholder: 
 
 Provided that in case of regular premium products, the insurer and/or the 
bank shall at least one day before the day of deduction under the direct debit 
instructions, send SMS at the registered number of the policyholder intimating 
the amount to be deducted under the insurance policy of the policyholder and 
another SMS at the time of deduction of the amount o f premium from the bank 
account: 
 
 Provided farther that in the case of distribution through telemarketing, 
the consent for deduction through direct debit shall be obtained verbal ly on 
recorded line and in the case of sales through other technology based distribution 
channels, the consent for deduction through direct debit shall be obtained through 
acceptance of the policyholder on a secure web -based ―I agree‖ or ―I accept‖ 
button: 
 
 Provided further that in case of discontinuance of a policy sold through 
the bank, the direct debit authority shall stand cancelled and necessary measures 
shall be taken by the insurer and the bank to ensure that no further amounts on 
account of premium are deducted from the bunk account of the policyholder. 
 
 6. Marketing Brochures and Sales Material. —(1) The content and 
layout of all marketing and sales related materials used to solicit business through 
corporate insurance ag ents shall be approved both by th e corporate insuran ce 
agent and the insurer and should not be in conflict with applicable insurance laws 
2741(10) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
and regulations. The insurer shall be primarily responsible for the accuracy of all 
contents of advertising and sales material. 
 
 (2) In all such sales material the relative roles of the corporate 
insurance agent and the insurer shall be clearly stated at a prominent place 
including but not limited to policy servicing, claims lodgement and claims 
processing and must clearly state that the corporate insurance agent is acting on 
behalf of the insurer, who is the principal and responsible for all li abilities under 
the policy and t he name, address and contact details of the insurer shall also be 
mentioned at a prominent place. 
 
 (3) The market conduct rules and rules issued in respect of the 
insurance agent by the Commission shall be observed by the corporate insurance 
agent. 
 
 (4) For life insurance, wherever applicable, illustration of benefits , on 
the prescribed format provided by the insurer shall be signed or accepted on a 
secure web based ―I agree ‖ or ―I accept ‖ button at the time of sales, by the 
specified p erson and the inten ding policyholder and any insurance proposal, 
where the illustration of benefits is missing, unsigned (physically or 
electronically) or is not based on the product parameters mentioned in the 
proposal form, shall not be accepted by the insurer for any further process. 
 
 (5) The marketing brochures, sales material and products in formation 
available on the websites of the insurer and the corporate insurance agent should 
be consistent with each other and the corporate insurance agent shall disclose 
their agency status on their websites and during the call back confirmation with 
the policyholder that they are act ing as agent for the insurer in compliance with 
section 100 of the Ordinanee. 
 
 7. Claims Handling.—(1) Under the arrangement with the corporate 
insurance agent, the claim adjudication and settlement shall be the responsibility 
of the insurer and the corporate insurance agent shall play a facilitating role by 
assisting the policyholder or nominee(s), as the case may be, in claim processing. 
The contact de tails of the insurer for claim settlement shall be prominently 
displayed on the insurance contract and also be made available by the insurer to 
the corporate insurance agent so that the information can be cascaded to the 
policyholder or nominee(s) at the time of claim intimation. 
 
 (2) The corporate insurance agent shall facilitate the insurer in all 
possible manner in collecting the necessary documents and information related to 
claims, as requested by the insurer and the corporate insurance agent shall no t 
question the information requested by the insurer for cl aim adjudication and 
settlement, and shall not interfere with or influence the decision of the insurer 
regarding the payment or repudiation of a claim. 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(11) 
 
 (3) The process of claim lodgement shall be a ppropriately 
communicated to the policyholder along with the policy document and the 
insurer shall acknowledge receipt of claim within seven working days along with 
communication of all the required documents or information for claim 
processing. The insure r shall settle a claim within a period of ninety days as 
provided in section 118 of the Ordinance. Before declining a claim, on account of 
deficiencies in claim documents submi tted, the insurer shall communicate to the 
beneficiary (or the guardian as the case may be) such deficiencies within fourteen 
days from the date of provision of said documents to the insurer. 
 
 (4) The insurer shall make the claim settlement directly in the name of 
the policyholder, life assured, his nominee or guardian, as the case may be. 
 
 8. Commission payable to corporate insurance agents. —(1) The 
level of commission payable to the corporate insurance agent for its role of 
soliciting and procuring insurance business may vary based on any performance 
criteria which the insurer and corporate insurance agent may agree and the rates 
and structure of the commission shall be clearly mentioned in the agency 
agreement. 
 
 (2) Any commission to b e paid by the insurer to the corporate 
insurance agent must be computed on premiums received by t he insurer and 
under no circumstances the commission on premiums to be received in future , be 
paid. 
 
 (3) The corporate insurance agent shall not charge, to the policyholder, 
any service fee, processing fee, administration charge or any other charge unless 
such a charge has been included by the insurer in the premium and 
communicated to the policyholder in advance. 
 
 (4) Nothing in regulation 8(1) shall prevent the insurer from sharing 
any third party costs incurred by the corporate insurance agent related to 
advertising or development of marketing material subject to the limits specified 
under regulation 13. 
 
 (5) The following shall be applicable for life insurers, in addition to 
those stated above: 
 
 (a) The commission payable to the corporate insurance a gent shall be 
in the form as set out in these Regulations and shall not exceed the 
limits set out in these Regulations; and 
 
 (b) Any sharing of third party costs incurred by the corporate insurance 
agent related to advertising or development of marketing material 
shall be subject to the limits specified under regulation 13. 
2741(12) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 9. Pricing, Risk Asses sment, Insura nce R elated Documents.—(1) 
Pricing of insurance products shall be the sole domain of the insurer and the 
corporate insurance agent shall not interfere in this process. 
 
 (2) Risk assessment, determining the risk premium and insurance 
underwriting shall be the responsibility of the insurer and the corporate insurance 
agent shall not interfere in this process. 
 
 (3) Where the insurer has provided automated underwriting software to 
the corporate insurance agent to accept and underwrite insurance proposals, the 
corporate insurance agent may use the system based on the exact guidelines 
provided by the insurer. (For insurance proposals underwritten through s uch a 
system, and where the policy can be issued immediately without referring the 
proposal to the insurer. the corporate insur ance agent, based on the guidelines 
provided by the insurer, may issue policy/certificate/document to the 
policyholder). 
 
 (4) The corporate insurance agent shall abide by the guidelines 
provided by the insurer for usage of the automated underwriting computer system 
and the use of the system by any sales channel of the corporate insurance agent 
does not imply in any way, or entitle the corporate insurance agent to represent 
itself or act as the insurance underwriter. 
 
 (5) The name of the corporate insurance agent shall not appear in the 
policy document as this could mislead or deceive the buyer of the insurance 
product and all requi rements for new products (for life insurance), as mentioned 
in the Ordinance, shall be complied with by the insurer: 
 
 Provided that in case of bancassura nce business, the insurers shall 
remove the names of the banks from their name of the products and pol icy 
documents. The name and logo of the insurer should be placed prominently in all 
the marketing material including the product brochure such that it becomes clear 
to the intending policyholder that the product is a product of the insurer and not 
of the bank. Moreover, the name of the insurer shall b e made part of the product 
name: 
 
 Provided further that the requirement provided in the first proviso above 
shall apply mutatis mutandis on other corporate insurance agents as well. 
 
 (6) The Insurer shall sub mit a copy of t he agencey agreement. that it 
has entered into with the corporate insurance agent or has made any subsequent 
amendment therein, for the record of the Commission within fifteen days of its 
execution. This requirement shall apply to both life and non-life insurers. 
 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(13) 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR CORPORATE INSURANCE AGENT, 
INSURER AND SPECIFIED PERSONS 
 
 10. Code of conduct for corporate insurance agent. —Every 
corporate insurance agent shall,— 
 
 (a) ensure that the bank insurance executive or the corporate insurance 
executive and all specified persons are properly trained as per the 
relevant provisions of the Ordinance and these Regulations and 
possess sound knowledge of the insurance products they would 
market, and have undergone the process of the certification. 
 
 (b) ensure that the bank insurance executive or the corporate insurance 
executive and the specified person do not make any 
misrepresentation or make misleading statement to the prospect on 
policy benefits and returns available und er the policy which may 
tantamount to misleading or being deceptive under the relevant 
provisions of the Ordinance in respect of the market conduct. 
 
 (c) ensure that no prospect is coerced by the bank insurance executive 
or the corporate insurance executi ve or specified Person to buy an 
insurance product. 
 
 (d) give adequate pre -sale and post -sale advises to the prospective 
insured in respect of the insurance product. 
 
 (e) extend all possible assistance and cooperation to an insured/ 
nominee in completion of all formalities and documentation in the 
event of a claim; 
 
 (f) give due publicity to the fact that the corporate insurance agent 
does not underwrite the risk or act as an Insurer; and 
 
 (g) ensure proper training of persons engaged in sales of insura nce 
products and also enlighten such persons about the consequences of 
being engaged in misselling, misleading or deceptive conduct under 
these Regulations. 
 
 11. Code of conduct for bank insurance executives or corporate 
insurance executives and specified persons.—(1) Every bank insurance 
executive or the corporate insurance executive or specified person shall,— 
 
2741(14) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (a) identify that the corporate insurance agent is acting as an agent of 
the insurer at every meeting with the prospect and shall always 
ensure mentioning the name of the insurer to the prospect; 
 
 (b) disseminate the requisite information in respect of the insurance 
products offered for sale by the insurer and take into account the 
needs of the prospect while recommending/tailoring a specific 
insurance plan; 
 
 (c) indicate the premium to be charged by the insurer for the insurance 
product offered for sale; 
 
 (d) for an insurance product which is bundled with any other product 
offered by the Corporate insu rance agent, mention the cost of the 
insurance product and the other product separately; 
 
 (e) guide the prospect about the content, purpose and manner of filling 
the proposal form explain to him th e importance of disclosure of 
material information required under the relevant insurance contract 
and that non -disclosure and/or misrepresentation of material 
information on the proposal form may lead to refusal of claim by 
the insurer; 
 
 (f) assist the prospect in filling the proposal form, however, utmost 
effort shall be made that the proposal form is, preferably, filled by 
the prospective policyholder himself. 
 
 (g) obtain the requisite documents at the time of completion of the 
proposal form by the prospect and other documents subsequently 
asked by the Insurer in connection therewith; and 
 
 (h) render such assistance to the policyholder or claimant or nominee, 
as may be required in complying with the requirements for 
settlement of claims by the Insurer. 
 
 (2) No Specified person shall,— 
 
 (a) solicit or procure insurance business without undergoing the 
certification process; 
 
 (b) give information to t he prospect which deviates from the 
information provided by the Insurer with regard to the in surance 
product; 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(15) 
 
 (c) induce or misguide the prospect to avoid disclosing any material 
information in the proposal Form; 
 
 (d) induce or misguide the prospect to submit incorrect information in 
the proposal form or documents submitted to the Insur ar for 
acceptance of the proposal; 
 
 (e) behave in a discourteous manner with the prospect; 
 
 (f) interfere with any pro posal introduced by any other specified 
person or any insurance agent of the Insurer; 
 
 (g) offer different rates, benefits, terms and conditions other than those 
offered or agreed by the Insurer; 
 
 (h) demand or receive a share of proceeds from the policy holder or 
claimant or nominee under an insurance contract; 
 
 (i) force a policyholder to terminate the existing policy and to effect a 
new proposal from him within three years from the date o f such 
termination; and 
 
 (j) become or remain a director of any insurer; 
 
 (3) In case of bancassurance business, the insurer shall require the bank 
to seek an undertaking from the specified persons selling insurance products at 
the front desk of the bank branch to comply with the code of conduct provided 
above. 
 
CHAPATER IV 
 
LIMIT ON THE COMMISSION PAYABLE TO CORPORATE 
INSURANCE AGENT 
 
 12. Direct sales model. —Where a corporate insurance agent uses its 
own sales force to market and distribute insurance products through its own 
distribution channel then such model shall be referred to as direct sales model. 
 
 (a) Regular premi um individual life plans. —(savings products and 
protection products) 
 
 (i) First policy year commission to corporate insurance 
agent.—In the first policy year the commission to the 
2741(16) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
corporate insura nce agent will be subject to the maximum 
limit given as per table Al in schedule to these Regulations; 
 
 (ii) Renewal years commission to corporate insurance 
agent.—For the efforts of the corporate insurance agent in 
collecting second year and subsequent y ear‘s premium the 
second policy year commission and subsequent policy year 
commission to the corporate insurance agent (as a percentage 
of the corresponding policy year collected premium) will he 
subject to the maximum limit given as per table Al in schedule 
to these Regulations; 
 
 (iii) Share in investment management charge (as an alternative 
to second policy year and onwards commission rate). —
Starting from the second policy year onwards, for investment 
linked unit linked and investment linked account valu e 
products, the insurer shall be allowed to share with the 
corporate insurance agent, a par t of the investment 
management fee as a percentage of the net asset value (NAV) 
of the underlying unit linked fund, or the investment fund up 
to the exten t of the fund attributable to the policies procured 
through the corporate insurance agent. The maximum share of 
the corporate insurance agent in the NAV shall at any time not 
exceed 50% of the total investment management fee charged 
by the insurer on the fund to the extent of the policies 
procured through the corporate insurance agent, up to a 
maximum of 0.75% per annum of the NAV. 
 
 (iv) Production bonus .—In lieu of lowe r first policy year 
commission, an insurer shall be a llowed to pay production 
bonus to the corpor ate insurance agent linked to achievement 
of mutually agreed new business targets. The sum of th e 
production bonus percentage and first policy year commission 
shall not exceed the maximum commission rate mentioned in 
schedule to these Regulations. The prod uction b onus in 
aggregate as a percenta ge of the first policy year c ollected 
premium shall not exceed 5%. 
 
 (v) Persistency bonus.—For the efforts of the corporate 
insurance agent in collecting renewal prem ium, and 
improving and maintaining persistency, an insurer shall be 
allowed to pay persistency bonus to the corporate insurance 
agent based on minimum persistency level achieved and the 
rates as per as per table A2 in schedule to these Regulations. 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(17) 
 
An insurer may split 4th year and onward commission rates 
into upfront commission and targeted persistency level. 
 
 (vi) Maximum aggregate commission. —The maximum 
commission payable, i.e. cumulative first policy year, second 
policy year and subsequent policy year onwards commission, 
as stated above, over the ent ire premium paying term of a 
policy shall not exceed the maximum limits prescribed as per 
schedule to these Regulations. For policies wit h premium 
paying terms between 10 and 20 years, or terms less than 10 
years, these limits shall he prorated according t o premium 
paying term. 
 
 (b) The maximum com mission limits as per schedule to these 
Regulations will also be applicable for single premium savings 
products, regular premium annuities, regular premium personal 
accident type policies, group term life policie s for retail customers 
of corporate insurance agent, including yearly r enewable term 
policies, personal accident policies , group credit life and similar 
products. 
 
 13. Sales and marketin g incentives to corporate insurance 
agents.—(1) To promote business through corporate insurance agents, an insurer 
shall be allowed to share with the corporate insurance agent in the costs of sales 
and marketing incentives including sales conventions and awards called by 
whatever name in respect of business through corporat e insurance agent. The 
share of the Insurer in such activities shall not exceed 5% of the first policy year 
collected premium: 
 
 Provided that sales and marketing incentive shall not be applicable on 
contracts having term of not more than one year (includi ng yearly renewable 
plans) and on single premium products: 
 
 Provided further that in order to promote sales of small ticket insurance 
policies, the insurer shall be allowed to share with the corporate insurance agent , 
sales and marketing incentive for sma ll tickets insurance policies having term of 
not more than one year and having such gross premium a s may be specified by 
the Commission. The sharing of sales and marketing incentive under this proviso 
shall only be eligible for new business acquired throug h enrolment of new 
policyholders. 
 
 (2) For the purpose of sub regulation (1) above, an insurer shall 
incorporate the minimum persistency benchmarks, as given in table A2 and A3 to 
the schedule, with all sales and marketing incentives including sales conv ention 
at each corporate insurance agent level. 
2741(18) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (3) All insurers shall provide a separate disclosure of expenses incurred 
under sub-regulation (1) above to be included in the statement of expenses as 
specified under regulation 31(b). 
 
 14. Referral model. —(1) If an insurer uses its own insurance 
consultants to market and distribute insurance products through the corporate 
insurance agent distribution channel based on sales leads generated by the 
corporate insurance agent such a model shall be referred to h enceforth as the 
referral model. 
 
 (2) The total direct expenses incurred by the insurer in respect of new 
business as commission to the corporate insurance agent, salaries and 
commission to its Insurance Consultants, sales and marketing incentives to the 
corporate insurance agent or its insurance consultants and production bonuses 
shall be within the aggregate of all first year limits prescribed in regulation 12 
and 13 above for each type of product: 
 
 Provided that in case of regular premium individual life products, the life 
insurer shall be allowed to incur an expense of up to 5% of the first year collected 
premium (over and above the aggregate of all first year limits), as salaries to its 
insurance consultants, however, the amount of up to 5% shall be borne by the 
shareholders‘ fund of the life insurer and shall not be charged to the relevant 
statutory fund. 
 
 (3) The following shall apply to regular premium individual life plans 
(savings products and protection products), in addition to sub -regulations (1) and 
(2) where relevant: 
 
 (a) First policy year commission to corporate insurance agents 
(as % or first year collected premium).— The first year commission 
to the corporate insurance agent shall be as per Table A 1 in 
Schedule. The insurer may, based on the product structure, link the 
commission rate to the premium paying term of the policy, subject 
to the condition that the maximum commission at any premium 
paying term shall not exceed the above maximum limit. 
 
 (b) Renewal year commission to corporate insurance agent. —For 
the efforts of the corporate insurance agent in collecting second 
year and subsequent year ‘s premium, the second policy year 
commission and subsequent policy year commission to the 
corporate insurance agent (as a percentage of the corr esponding 
year collected premium) will be subject to the maximum limits 
given as per Table A1 in Schedule to these Regulations. 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(19) 
 
 (c) Persistency bonus. —For the efforts of the corporate insurance 
agent in collecting renewal pre mium and improving and 
maintaining persistency, an insurer shall be allowed to pay 
persistency bonus to the corporate insurance agent based on 
minimum persistency level achieved and the rates as per table A3 
under schedule to these Regulations. An insurer may split 4th year 
and onward commission rates into upfront commission and targeted 
persistency level. 
 
 (d) Where the corporate insurance agent agrees to a co mmission rate 
which is less than the m aximum prescribed in schedule, t he insurer 
shall have the option to pay the difference in the commission rate as 
part of the second or later years ‘ commission, provided the product 
structure permits such a commission structure. 
 
 (4) An insurer shall not give commission to a corporate insurance agent 
in any manner other than as described above in this regulation and regulation 12. 
 
 15. Commission claw-back.—(1) This provision shall apply to the life 
insurance policies and non-life insurance personal lines products, sold through 
the corporate insurance agent. 
 
 (2) Where a policyholder has inti mated within the sp ecified time 
period, to the insurer or the corporate insurance agent that the policy was missold 
and the insurer subsequently determines that the policy was missold in 
accordance with sub-regulation (3) to (4), then the entire commission paid by the 
insurer to the corporate insurance agent will b e clawed back and 100% of the 
premium paid by the policyholder shall be refunded to the policyholder. For the 
purposes of this sub-regulation, the specified time period shall be as follows: 
 
 (a) Within twenty five (25) months alter issuance of li fe insurance 
policies in respect of regular premium i ndividual li fe inve stment 
plans offered as investment contracts ( i.e. either investment linked 
unit linked policy or investment linked account value pol icy) or 
conventional non-linked policy; 
 
 (b) Within thirty (30) days after issuance of life insurance policies with 
term equal to or less than one year and all non-life personal lines 
insurance policies; and 
 
 (c) Before commencement of insurance coverage in respe ct of travel 
insurance policies: 
 
2741(20) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 Provided that the application of automatic commission claw -back under 
regulation 16 below shall not in any case be considered to preclude the insurer to 
undertake investigation in to any alleged misselling under any such policy. 
 
 (3) Upon receipt of intimation from a policyholder regarding 
misselling, an insurer shall be responsible to investigate that the policy was 
actually missold within 30 days from the date of receipt of such intimation. 
 
 (4) For the purpos e of these Regulations, a n insurance policy shall be 
considered as missold i f any of the regulatory requirements , including but not 
limited to training of speci fied person, disclosures in marketing and sales 
material, sales process and additionally in case of life insurance policies , 
financial underwriting, after sales-call and recycling of life insurance policies 
have not been complied with in letter and spirit. 
 
 (5) Sub-regulation (2) shall not preclude an insurer to entertain 
misselling intimations rece ived after the aforementioned time period, excluding 
clause (c) of sub-regulation (2) above. 
 
 (6) In case of regular premium individual life investment plans 
including endowment products, if during second policy year, the annual premium 
of a regular premi um individual li fe insurance policy is reduced by more than 
25% of the original annual premium, then the excessive reduction i.e, the 
difference between actual reduction and allowed reduction of 25% will deemed 
to be an adhoc premium paid by the policyhold er in the first policy year. The 
excessive reduction in the annual premium (after adjusting for the first year 
allocation of premium in respect of the aforementioned excessive reduction) will 
be transferred to the policyholder ‘s investment account or unit value to give an 
effect that such differential premium is paid by the policyholder along with the 
most recent premium payment. 
 
 Explanation:—For the purposes of this sub -regulation the ter m ―adhoc 
premium‖ means the additional lump sum amount of premium ( in addition to the 
regular premium) paid by the policy holder to increase the investment component 
(i.e. cash value) of the policy. 
 
 (7) The differential commission will be calculated by applying the 
difference in commission rate in the first year between a regular premiu m plan 
and single premium plan on the excessive reduction. The differential commission 
will be clawed back from the corporate insurance agent and retained by the 
Insurer. 
 
 
 16. Automatic commission claw -back.—(1) Where a regular 
premium individual life insurance policy lapses due to non -payment of second 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(21) 
 
year premium due under the policy (after the lapse of the grace period provided 
under the policy), due to any reason whatsoever, the policy shall be subject to 
automatic claw-back of commission as per the sub-regulation (2) below: 
 
 Provided that the provision of sub -regulation (1) shall not apply in the 
case of those policyholders which had undergone medical examination for the 
purchase of the insurance policy: 
 
 Provided further that in the case of bancassurance business, the provision 
of sub-regulation (1) shall also not apply in the ease of those policyholders whose 
account with the bank became inactive or dormant or had insufficient account 
balance due to which the bank was not able to deduct premium from the account 
of such policyholder and the policyholder on being approached by the insurance 
company agreed in writing to either pay the premium after removing of 
dormancy of such bank account or through any other instrument as deemed fit by 
the policyholder: 
 
 Provided further that where an insurance policyholder himself 
deliberately discontinues his policy by not paying the second year premium. the 
provisions of sub -regulation (1) shall not apply, however, it shall be the 
responsibility of the insurer and the corporate insurance agent to seek a written 
confirmation from the policyholder in this regard. The insurer shall also make a 
call back to such policyholder seeking his consent on discontinuance of his 
policy and shall retain the record of such calls for a period of at least three years. 
 
 (2) Where a policy becomes subject to automatic claw -back of 
commission under sub -regulation (1), after two months from the expiry of the 
grace period under the policy, the commission paid to the cor porate insurance 
agent shall be clawed hack and ninety (90) percent of the gross premium sh all be 
paid to the policyholder: 
 
 Provided that the commission to be clawed back from the corporate 
insurance agent, under a policy subject to automatic claw -back of commission, 
shall be the amount of first year commission paid to the corporate insurance 
agent less five (5) percent of the gross premium paid under the policy: 
 
 Provided further that in the case of unit linked products, where the 
policyholder opts to i nvest the amount in his investment account in a unit linked 
fund which significantly invests, ei ther directly or indirectly in e quity securities 
ninety (90) percent of gross premium to be paid under this sub-regulation shall be 
adjusted fo r the gain or los s arising fr om the investment made from the 
investment account of the policyholder. 
 
 Explanation:—For the purpose of proviso to sub -regulation (2) above, 
indirect investment in equity securities means taking investment exposure in a 
2741(22) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
mutual fund, which sig nificantly invests in equity Securities. A unit linked fund 
shall be considered to have significant investment in equity securities if: 
 
 (a) the objective of that unit linked fund is to invest in equity securities, 
directly or indirectly; or 
 
 (b) if the equity portfolio of that unit linked fund, at any point in time 
during the previous complete year, constituted at least 20% of its 
total assets under management. 
 
 (3) If after the refund of amount, as per sub -regulation (2) above, the 
policyholder approaches the insurer for reinstatement of the policy. the insurer 
may reinstate the policy subject to receipt of all due premiums under the policy 
and meeting of policy conditions by the policyholder. 
 
 (4) The policies subject to automatic claw -back of com mission under 
this regulation shall be included in the calculation of premium due for the 
purposes of calculation of second year persistency a the insurer. 
 
 17. Minimum cask values. —(1) Notwithstanding the terms and 
conditions of the life insurance policy all insurers are required to pay the 
minimum cash values according to these Regulations. 
 
 (2) In case of an investment contract ( i.e. investment linked unit linked 
policy or investment linked account value policy) or conventional non -linked 
policy with cash value, if an Insurer has determined that the policy was missold 
as per sub -regulations (3) and (4) of regulation 15, then 100% of the premium 
shall be refunded buck to the policyholder by the Insurer. 
 
 18. Sales process for business through corporate ins urance 
agent.—The following requirements shall apply to all regular premium 
individual life insurance policies sold through corporate insurance agents: 
 
 (a) Bilingual documents to be provided to policyholder. —All 
documents provided to the policyholder suc h as proposal form, 
marketing brochure, sales material, policy documents and any other 
pre-sale or post -sale document provided to the policyholder or the 
prospective policyholder shall be bilingual i.e. both in English 
language and Urdu language written as line by line translation on 
the same page. 
 
 (b) Free look period to be mentioned at prominent place on policy 
document, policy schedule and marketing material. —The 
insurer shall ensure that it is mentioned in bold font, at a prominent 
place on first page of the policy document, policy schedule and 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(23) 
 
marketing material that the policyholder can cancel the policy 
within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the policy documents by 
the policyholder. 
 
 (c) Audio-visual clip for guidance on proposal form and key 
product features. —The insurer shall ensure that a brie faudio-
visual clip (in English or Urdu language), of at least two (2) minute 
duration is shown to the prospective policyholder prior to providing 
him/her the proposal form for filling. The audio -visual clip shall 
cover at least the following: 
 
 (i) key features of the insurance product being offered covering 
premium payment, coverage extended, minimum financial 
component, free look period, surrender options and partial 
withdrawals etc. 
 
 (ii) contents of the proposal form, its significance, duty to provide 
accurate information and implication of non-disclosure and/or 
material misrepresentation of material information on claim 
adjudication. 
 
 In the case of sale of regular premium individual life policies sold 
through telemarketing the requirement of showing audio-visual clip 
shall not be applicable. 
 
 The insurer shall file with the Commission the audio -visual clips 
prepared under this clause, along with the confirmation required 
under sub-regulation (4) of regulation 1 to these Regulations. 
 
 (d) Communication during policy cycle.— 
 
 (i) The insurer shall maintain continuous communication with the 
policyholder so as to provide him pertinent information about 
the policy and any ancillary matters related thereto, in a timely 
and effective manner through the communication channel, 
chosen by the policyholder, throughout the policy cycle. The 
insurer will, at the least, communicate with the policyholder in 
the following instances as follows: 
 
 (a) The insurer shall send a ―welcome message ‖ through 
SMS at the registered mobile number of the policyholder 
containing information about issuance of insurance 
policy, dispatch of insurance policy documents , and free 
look period clause. 
 
2741(24) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (b) The insurer shall send the renewal notice to the 
policyholder prior to the due date o f premuim throu gh 
mail/courier or email at his / her active email address, or 
both as s pecified by the policyholder in writing at the 
time of policy inception, or later. The insurer will also 
send follow-up SMS for collection of renewal premium, 
two days after sending the renewal notices. The insurer 
shall send the renewal notices for policies with variable 
premium payment frequencies, at the foll owing 
intervals, as provided through the table below: 
 
Premium payment 
frequency 
Minimum No. of days 
prior to due date 
Annual Thirty days 
Semi annual Fifteen days 
Quarterly One week 
Monthly One week 
 
 (c) After premium payment is received by the insurer from 
the policyholder. the insurer shall send an SMS for 
acknowledging the receipt of payment to the 
policyholder, in addition to any other payment 
acknowledgment receipt provided to the policyholder; 
 
 (d) The insurer shall send intimation of effectuating 
endorsement for any change in the i nsuranec pol icy 
through email at the active email address of the 
policyholder or SMS, or both, as preferred by the 
policyholder. Thereafter, the insurer shall also send the 
endorsement through mail/courier or email, or both , as 
specified by the policyholder in writing. 
 
 (e) if renewal premium is not received one month after 
premium due date despite renewal notices and follow up 
SMS sent by the insurer, the insurer will make an 
interactive telephonic call to the policyholder, within one 
month, to remind him about the d eposit of renewal 
premium, inquire the reason f or not depositing the 
renewal premiu m, and guide him about the non -
forfeiture options that the policy may acquire in case of 
non-payment of premium. 
 
 (ii) The SMS required to be sent by the insurer under this clause 
shall be in both Urdu and English language. 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(25) 
 
 (e) Acknowledgment of receipt of policy documents/ terms.— 
 
 (i) In case of issuance of insurance policies with saving 
component, the insurer shall obtain acknowledgment of the 
receipt of documents or policy terms, as the case may be, from 
the policyholder preferably through email or SMS. This 
requirement shall apply on a ll policies issued through all 
modes inter alia branch visit, telephone or internet. 
 
 (ii) The insurers are encouraged to obtain such acknowledgement 
in case of issuance of protection products with no saving 
component. 
 
 (f) Insurance need analysis document.— 
 
 (i) No regular premium individual life insurance policy will be 
sold through corporate insurance agent unless the specified 
person has carried out an ―insurance need analysis ‖ of the 
prospective customer. A general fo rmat has been given in 
Annexure-I to these Regulations containing the minimum 
aspects to be covered by such a document. An insurer may use 
a different format for additional information. 
 
 (ii) The specified person shall be responsible for filling the 
insurance need analysis document on the basis of inform ation 
obtained from the potential polic yholder. Based on the 
findings f rom the insurance need analysis document, the 
policyholder shall be pitched the most suitable product that 
meets the identified needs. 
 
 (iii) Insurers and the corporate insurance agents are encouraged to 
ensure that the insurance need analysis of the potential 
policyholders is conducted through an a utomated application/ 
software, which is able to provide rating relating to 
policyholder‘s risk appetite. The insurance product to be 
pitched shall be on the basis of risk appetite rating given to the 
potential policyholder by the automated application/software. 
 
 (g) Format of illustration. —The insurer and the corporate insurance 
agent shall ensure that no regular premium individual life insurance 
policy shall be sold through the corporate insurance agent unless 
the specified person has provided the illust ration as per the format 
prescribed by the Commission from time to time. 
 
2741(26) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (h) Illustration to be given as a stand -alone documen t.—The 
corporate insurance agent shall ensure that the illustration has been 
given to the prospect as a stand -alone document ena bling him to 
take an informed decision considering the appropriateness of a 
particular insurance product with his identified insurance needs. 
The corporate insurance agent shall ensure that there must be a 
reasonable time period available to a prospect to understand the 
illustration before purchasing a life insurance product. 
 
 Explanation:—Clause (h) above is not intended to breakdown 
the sales process into two phases. The objective of this regulation is 
to ensure that the specified person has properly explained the 
product illustration to a prospective customer. 
 
 (i) Minimum financial protection. —The minimum financial 
protection component ( i.e. sum cover payable on death due to any 
cause) for regular premium individual li fe plans and single 
premium pl an, sold through corporate insur agents, shall be in 
accordance with the minimum financial protection prescribed under 
Unit Linked Products and Fund Rules, 2015 as amended from time 
to time. This shall be applicable to conventional non -linked 
products, uni t linked investment linked products as well account 
value universal life products. 
 
 (j) Minimum term of the regular premium individual life plans. — 
No insurer shall issue an individual life insurance regula r premium 
(saving) plan of a term shorter than 5 years through the corporate 
insurance agent. 
 
 (k) Recycling of life insuranee policies.— 
 
 (i) Where a regular premium individual life policy is lapsed / 
surrendered during the first three policy years, then unless that 
policy is reinstated (in case of la psation), a corporate 
insurance agent will not sell any new individual life policy to 
the same policyholder through the same insurer or through a 
different insurer within a year from the effective date of the 
policy acquiring lapsed / surrendered status. 
 
 (ii) Where a regular premium individual life policy is lapsed / 
surrendered after the third policy year then unless that policy 
is reinstated / revived or the policyholder h as separatel y 
consented to that effect, a corporate insurance agent will not 
sell a similar new individual life policy to the same 
policyholder through the same insurer or through a different 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(27) 
 
insurer within a year from the e ffective date of the policy 
acquiring lapsed / surrendered status. 
 
 (l) Minimum financial underwriting.— 
 
 (i) An insurer shall consider the regular income of the proposed 
policyholder in determining the affordability of the policy 
from the perspective of policyholder as per their existing 
financial underwriting guidelines applicable to direct sales 
force distribution channel. 
 
 (ii) In the case of ban cassurance business , an insu rer should 
consider, amongst other pertinent factors, the average balance 
maintained by the prospect at the concerned bank during at 
least the last year in assessing his annual regular income. 
 
 (iii) At the time of policy issuance, the insurer will carry out and 
document an assessment as to whether the insured would be 
able to pay subsequent premiums as and when falling due, 
based on insured‘s current financial resources. 
 
 (iv) The underwriting committee of the insurer shall, on a sample 
basis, analyse the assessment carried out in accordance with 
sub-clause (iii) above, and incorporate the findings so made, 
in the insurer‘s underwriting guidelines/policy. 
 
 (m) After sale call by the insurer to all policyholders.— 
 
 (i) The insurer shall make a structured telephonic call to all 
policyholders to confirm their understanding of the product, 
appropriateness of the product considering the identified 
insurance needs and affordability of the product for the entire 
term. The insurer will retain the record of such calls, 
preferably using interactiv e voice response system, for at 
least 7 years or maturity of the product whichever is earlier; 
 
 (ii) The after sale call mentioned at sub -clause (i) above s hall be 
made at least one day after the sale is closed within a period of 
seventy two (72) hours. For ensuring that the call back 
confirmation is with the policyholder himself, the insurer shall 
devise policyholder identification mechanisms such as, 
telephone personal identification number (T -PIN), question 
about mother‘s maiden name etc. 
 
2741(28) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (iii) In the case of bancassurance business, as an alternative to sub-
clause (i) above, an insurer may integrate their after sale call 
scripts with the bank ‘s call back information mechanism to 
the b ancassurance policyholders. However; the product 
specific scripts of such calls, as per Annexure -III to these 
Regulations, needs to be submitted to the Commi ssion along 
with agency agreement; 
 
 (iv) If a policyholder gives an adverse response; the insurer will 
return the premium to the policyholder within 30 days of such 
call. 
 
 (v) The after sale call made in accordance with this clause, 
whether made by the bank or the Insurer, shall allow cross 
questioning from the policyhold er in Urdu or his native 
language. The minimum aspects of every after sales call, to 
be comm unicated to the policyholder are provided as 
Annexure-III to these Regulations: 
 
 Provided that the Commission shall have the power to 
revise/ amend Annexur e-III to the Regulations from time to 
time. 
 
 (vi) The insurer shall ensure that the call centre representatives 
authorized to make after sales call on behalf of the insurer are 
well conversant with the insurance policy contents and 
elements required to be commu nicated to the policyholder 
during the call. The insurer shall also ensure that the call 
centre representatives are well acquainted with subject of 
insurance such that they are able to respond to the queries 
made by the policyholder during the interactive after sale call. 
 
 (vii) The after sale call shall not be made by the sales staff which 
has been engaged in sale of insurance policies. 
 
 (viii) The requirment to make after -sale call under this clause is 
applicable in case of insurance polici es with savi ngs 
component and not in case of protection products. 
 
 19. Minimum allocations of pri mium to investment account of 
insurance policies with saving component.—(1) With effect from July 1, 2021, 
in all individu al life regular premium poli cies with savings/ i nvestment 
component sold through the co rporate insurance agent, the Insurer shall ensure 
that minimum allocations into investment account of insurance policyholder have 
been made as per table given below: 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(29) 
 
Effective for New Business 
Issued on or after 
Policy 
Year 1 
Policy 
Year 2 
Policy 
Year 3 
Policy 
Year 4 
Policy Year 5 
and onwards 
July 1, 2021 50% 270% of the sum of 3 years Gross 
Premium 
100% 
July 1, 2022 55% 270% of the sum of 3 years Gross 
Premium 
100% 
July 1, 2023 57.5% 270% of the sum of 3 years Gross 
Premium 
100% 
July 1, 2024 60% 270% of the sum of 3 years Gross 
Premium 
100% 
 
 (2) For all such products referred to in sub -regulation (1) above, at the 
time of filling and signing of the proposal form, the de fault fund for minimum 
allocation into the investment account of the insurance policyholder shall be the 
money market unit linked fund or conservative or low risk unit linked fund or a 
unit linked fund the asset mix of which is a combination of both money market 
instruments or medium to long term government debt instruments of the 
concerned insurer. 
 
 Explanation:—For the purpose of this sub-regulation.— 
 
 (a) ―Money market unit linked fund ‖ refers to unit linked funds , 
wherein the underl ying fund significantly invests, directly or 
indirectly, in cash and cash equivalents and highly liquid short-term 
financial instruments and does no t have any investment in equity 
securities. 
 
 (b) ―Conservative or low risk unit linked fund ‖ refers to those unit 
linked funds, wherein the underlying fund significantl y invests, 
directly or indirectly, in medium to long term government debt 
instruments and does not have any investment in equity securities. 
 
 For the purposes of this sub -regulation, indirect investment in 
the money market unit linked fund or conser vative or low risk unit 
linked fund, means taking investment exposure in a mu tual fund, 
which significantly invests in money market instruments or 
medium to long term government debt instruments respectively. 
 
 (3) Where at the time of filling and signing of the proposal form or 
subsequently after the issuance of the policy, the policyholder ch oses to invest 
his premiums in a unit linked fund which significantly invests in equity securities 
or any other unit linked (not being the money market unit linked fu nd or the 
conservative of low risk unit linked fund), the corporate insurance agent shall 
obtain from the intending policyh older an undertaking as per Anne xure – II to 
these Regulations, which shall be made part of the policy record of the 
policyholder. 
2741(30) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (4) The Commission shall have the power to extend guidance to 
insurance companies on the different investment instruments permissible for 
inclusion in the unit linked funds referred to in this regulation. 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
 20. Fit and p roper criteria for bank insurance executive. —(1) 
Every bank shall ensure that the bank insurance executive fulfils the following fit 
and proper criteria: 
 
 (a) Comply with section 96 of the Ordinance; and 
 
 (b) Has at least 5 years work experience in an in surance company at a 
functional head level with direct or indirect responsibility for 
products and sales management or has at least 5 years work 
experience within the wealth management segment of a bank with 
exposure to banking products and sales management. 
 
 (2) The insurer shall, while entering into an agency agreement ensure 
that the bank insurance executive of the bank complies with the fit and proper 
criteria given above. 
 
 (3) For agency agreements effective as on the commencement date of 
these regulations, the insurer shall ensure that within a period of six months from 
the coming into effect of these regulations, the continuation of agency 
agreements with the bank, are subject to c ompliance by the bank with the f it and 
proper criteria of the bank insurance executive as per sub-regulation (1) above. 
 
 21. Training requirement for bank insurance executive.—(1) At the 
time of on-boarding a bank, the bank insurance executive shall undergo a training 
of at least 8 hours, organized by the concerned insurer , covering at a minimum 
the following: 
 
 (a) Introduction to concept of insurance and takaful; 
 (h) Principles of insurance; 
 (c) Overview of the Insurer; 
 (d) Details or products; 
 (e) Product and portfolio management; and 
 (f) Compliance with regulatory aspects (SEC P and SBP) including 
Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism 
laws. 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(31) 
 
 (2) Persons acting as bank insurance executive as on the 
commencement date of these regulations, shall be required to co mply with the 
training requirement s within six months of the coming into effect of these 
regulations. 
 
 (3) On joining a different bank, the bank insurance executive shall only 
be required to undergo an orientation with each insurer, with whom the bank has 
agency agreements, of at least 5 hours durations covering the specific content 
related to that insurer, product details, and upda te on regulatory requirements, if 
any. 
 
 (4) Where the bank insurance executive has already undertaken the 
training given at regulation (1) above and the bank e nters into an agency 
agreement with another insurer, the training shall be limited to the overview of 
the insurer and the details of the products of the insurer proposed to be offered. 
 
 (5) The Commission shall have the power to revise/amend the content 
of training of the bank insurance executive from time to time. 
 
 22. Certification requirement for the speci fied person.—(1) The 
specified person, at the time of joining an insurer or a corporate insurance agent , 
being assigned the job of sale of insurance products, shall undergo a foundation 
training course organized by the insurer of at least eighteen (18) hours duration 
covering at a minimum the following: 
 
 (a) Introduction to concept of insurance/takaful; 
 
 (b) Principles of insurance; 
 
 (c) Introduction of the insurance company, the corporate insurance 
agent and products specific to the corporate insurance agent; 
 
 (d) Sales process as provided in the Regulations and as am endment 
from time to time; 
 
 (e) Need based selling; 
 
 (f) Operational processes a nd documentation (insurer and corporate 
insurance agent); 
 
 (g) Client retention and persistency; 
 
 (h) Regulatory aspects of corporate ins urance agents including aspects 
of compliance with Anti -Money Laundering and Countering 
Terrorism of Financing laws; 
2741(32) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 (i) Sales pitch and objection handling; 
 
 (j) Career path with the Insurer; 
 
 (k) Ethical aspect; 
 
 (l) Grievance handling mechanism of insurer, corporate insurance 
agent and alternate grievance handling forums; and 
 
 (m) His duties towards the policyholder being representative of insurer. 
 
 (2) At the end of the foundation training cour se, the specified person 
shall b e certified by the insurer and the corporate insurance agent after 
undertaking an examination conducted by the insurer to solicit and procu re 
insurance business as per the terms of the agency agreement. 
 
 (3) The insurer shall periodically carry out refresher trainings as per the 
training protocols of the insurer. 
 
 (4) Persons acting as specified persons as on the commencement date 
of these regulations, shall be required to comply with the certification 
requirements within six months of the coming into effect of these regulations. 
 
 (5) On joining a different insurer or corporate insurance agent, the 
specified person who has completed foundat ion training course with one insurer, 
will be required to undergo only refresher course comprising of corporate 
insurance agent/insurer specific content, product details, and update on 
regulatory requirements, if ‘ any, and will not require to undergo full -fledge 
foundation course. 
 
 (6) The refresher course will not be of duration lesser than six (6) hours 
and will be followed by certification by the insurer and the corporate insurance 
agent. 
 
 (7) The Commission shall have the power to revise/amend the content 
of training of the specified persons from time to time. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
PROMOTING DIGITALIZATION 
 
 23. Training through distance learning modes. —The training of 
bank insurance executive and foundation/refresher course required to be 
completed by the spec ified persons may be conducted through distance learning 
modes including, but not limited to online lectures , pre-uploaded content on the 
website, mobile applications or other digital platforms, etc. 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(33) 
 
 24. Digital issuance of insurance policies. —(1) The insurer can issue 
policies for savings products, protection products and non-life insurance products 
in physical form (hard copy) or in electronic form (through email/ web portal/ 
mobile application/ SMS etc.), whichever is agreed by the policyholder, with or 
without the involvement of the corporate insurance agent. The insurers will send 
SMS for confirmation of policy issuance in Urdu and English language to all 
policyholders, in both instances: 
 
 Provided that the issuance of savings products in electronic form shall be 
done for policies solicited through web portal or mobile application only: 
 
 Provided further that in the c ase of savings products, the insurer shah 
ensure that the requirements of these regulations in respect of such products a re 
complied with including the requirements of call back confirmation. 
 
 (2) The insurer may meet the offer acceptance re quirement as 
envisaged in regulation 3 through digital modes using advanced digital signatures 
as defined in the Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002 or as prescribed by the 
Commission from time to time. 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
 
SUITABLE INSURANCE PRODUCTION 
 
 25. Availability of disversified products in the insurance market.—
(1) In order to ensure the availability of diversified products in the ins urance 
market so that needs of policyholders with variable risk appetite can be catered, 
life insurance companies are encouraged to diversify their product portfolio to be 
offered through corporate insurance agents. 
 
 (2) For the purposes of sub-regulation (1) above, the agency agreement 
of life insurers with corporate insurance agents shall stipulate the percentage of 
business comprising of conventional insurance products to be sold through the 
corporate insurance agent. 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO SALE OF INSURANCE 
THROUGH TECHNOLOGY BASED DISTRIBUTION CHANNELS 
 
 26. Provisions to be complied with when mobile network operator 
or internet is invol ved in insurance distribution. —The distribution of 
insurance products through mobile network operator or internet, will be governed 
by the provisions or this Chapter. The mobile network operator may , or may not 
be working in the capacity of an insurance agent. 
2741(34) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 27. Storage and safety or data. —The mobile network operator or the 
insurance broker may be entrus ted with respo nsibility of data storage and 
management on behalf of th e insurer. However, it is responsibility of insurer to 
ensure safety of policyholder data. The insurer will ensure that suitable 
mechanism, inc luding the data backup s ystem, is in place to store data and 
maintain its safety before delegation of this function to mobile network operator 
or the broker. 
 
 28. File and use procedure for products distributed through mobile 
network operators and internet. —(1) All life insurers are required to su bmit 
the details of the products as stipulated in sub-regulation (2) which they intend to 
distribute through mobile network operator and internet, whether as loyalty or 
voluntary product, to the Commission at least thirty (30) days before the intended 
date of launch of that product as per ―file and use‖ procedure. 
 
 (2) In addition to the existing product submission requirements for the 
life insurance products, the life insurers are required to submit the complete 
distribution plan with respective roles and responsibilities of each intermediary 
involved, the enrollment process and the premium payment mechanism. The 
information regarding responsibility of each party in respect of claim processing 
and complaints handling is also required to be submitted. 
 
 29. Communication of all terms and conditions through mobile and 
internet.—(1) In addition to the product details submitted as required by 
regulation 28 above, the life insurer is required to submit the manner and process 
to communicate all terms and conditio ns of policy to the policyholder or the life 
covered, through the chosen mode of communication whether through SMS, call 
or internet, or otherwise. 
 
 (2) The life and non -life insurer is required to ensure that the key facts 
such as sum assured/ policy ben efits, premium amount, fre e look period, period 
of covera ge and any other material fact, are communicated to the prospective 
policyholder before the offer to insurance contract is made. The detailed terms 
and conditions are required to b e communicated to t he policyholder after 
issuance of insurance policy and the onus of such communication as stated in this 
sub-regulation lies on insurer. 
 
 (3) In case of loyalty products , insurer is required to ensure that 
mechanism is in place to make life covered aware a bout coverage to which he is 
entitled, and manner of communicating complete terms and conditions to the life 
covered is in place soon after he becomes entitled to the coverage. 
 
 30. Manner of exiting the agency agreement. —(1) In case of 
involvement of mobile network operator in the distribution arrangement, whether 
in capacity or corporate insurance agent or otherwise, the insurer is required to 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(35) 
 
clearly stipulate the roles and responsibilities of each party involved such as the 
insurer, insurance broker, mobile network operator and third party administrator, 
if any, in the agency agreement required to be submitted to the Commission 
under these regulations. 
 
 (2) In case the mobile network operator or broker intends to exit the 
agency agreement, it will cont inue to perform its role in policy administration 
cycle for the policies distributed during the time when he was part of distribution 
arrangement under the valid agency agreement. 
 
 (3) If the mobile network operator or insurance broker cannot continue 
to play its role due to an unavoidable reason, it is required to obtain approval of 
the Commission for exit of such mobile networ k operator or insurance broker 
from policy administration cycle while submitting to the Commission the 
mechanism through which the existing policyholder will be informed about 
change of roles between the parties involved. 
 
 (4) If there is a change in the roles of any of the parties involved, the 
policyholder will be communicated in the most effective manner and utmost 
effort shall b e made to ensure that this information has been effectively 
comniunicated to the policyholder. 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
REGULATORY REPORTING OF BUSINESS WITH CORPORATE 
INSURANCE AGENTS 
 
 31. Financial Reporting.—(1) Every insurer shall at the expiration of 
each year prepare and deliver to the Commission, with reference to that year ‘s 
annual business with corporate insurance agents, within our months from the end 
of the period to which they refer, the following statements: 
 
 (a) Statement of premiums; 
 
 (b) Statement or expenses; 
 
 (c) Statement of claims; 
 
 (d) Statement of commission claw-back and minimum surrender value; 
and 
 
 (e) Statement of automatic commission clawback. 
 
 (2) The statements to be furnished under sub-regulation (1) above shall 
separately provide the business underwritten through bank and o ther corporate 
insurance agents: 
2741(36) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 Provided that in relation to reporting of ban cassurance business, the 
information to be provided shall be provided for each bank, with whom the 
insurer has an agency agreement: 
 
 Provided that for non -life insurers, the statements referred under sub -
regulation (1) shall be furnished, where the business underwritten by the non -life 
insurer with the corporate insurance agents, in aggregate, constitutes 10 %of the 
total gross premium revenue of the insurer. 
 
 32. Information to be provided in Financial Con dition Report 
(FCR) in respect of Bancassurance Business.—Every life insurer carrying out 
Bancassurance business shall prepare and file with the Commission the following 
statements which shall be annexed to the financial condition report, as required 
under section 50 of the Ordinance and the formats of these forms should be in 
accordance with the Annexure IV to the Insurance Rules, 2017 or any subsequent 
modification. If this information relates to a shorter period than a year , the forms 
may be adjusted accordingly.— 
 
 (a) in respect of Investment Linked Business,— 
 
 (i) Form LB-1, 
 (ii) Form LB-2; 
 (iii) Form LB-3; 
 (iv) Form DD; 
 (v) Form DDD; and 
 (vi) Form DDDD; 
 
 (b) in respect of Non-Investment Linked Business: 
 
 (i) Form NLB-1; 
 (ii) Form DD; 
 (iii) Form DDD; 
 (iv) Form DDDD; 
 
 (c) in respect of Universal Life and Universal Life Hybrid Business: 
 
 (i) Form ULB-1; 
 (ii) Form DD; 
 (iii) Form DDD; and 
 (iv) Form DDDD; 
 
 (d) in respect of Accident and Health Insurance Business,— 
 
 (i) Form NLB-1; and 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(37) 
 
 (e) Summary statements: 
 
 (i) Form II; 
 (ii) Form I; and 
 (iii) Statement of Composition and Distribution of surplus in 
respect of Policyholders‘ fund. 
 
 33. Reporting of Statement of Maximum Management Expenses.—
In addition to the information required under Regulation 31 and 32, every life 
insurer once a year, along with the Statement of Maximum Management 
Expenses as required under Sections 22(9) and 23(9) of the Ordinance, file an 
itemized computation for each Bank and product. This statement shall be 
certified by the Appointed Actuary. 
 
CHAPTER X 
 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
 
 34. Penalty for default in complying with, or acting in 
contravention of these Regulations. —(1) Any insurer who ma kes default in 
complying with or acts in contravention of any of the requirements of these 
Regulations, the Commission shall have the power to impose fine on the insurer 
and its directors, chief executive officer or any other officer of the insurer, who is 
knowingly a party to the default, which may extend to one million rupees and, in 
the case of a continuing default, with an additional fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues. 
 
 (2) Where it has been es tablished by the insurer that a specified person 
or the insurance consultant or the bank insurance executive or the corporate 
insurance executive or the designated insurance executive was engaged in 
misselling, misleading or deceptive conduct in the sale o f insurance products, 
such persons shall be disqualified or a period of not less than three years and the 
insurer shall enter the details of such persons in the centralized agents 
(s-reference) register maintained by the Central Depository Company under th e 
Centralized Information Sharing Solution for the Insurance Industry. 
 
CHAPTER XI 
 
REPEAL AND SAVINGS 
 
 31. Repeal.—The Bancassurance Regulations, 2015 and the Securities 
and Exchange Commission Directive for Corpora te Insurance Agents (excluding 
Banks) and Technology Based Distribution Channels, 2017 are hereby repealed 
wiih effect from July 1, 2021. 
 
2741(38) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 36. Savings.—Save as otherwise specifically provided, nothing in these 
Regulations, or any repeal effected thereby, shall affect or be deemed to affect 
anything done, action taken , investigation or proceedings commenced, order, 
appointment, conveyance, mortgage deed, document or agreement made, fee 
directed, resolution passed, direction given, proceedings taken or instru ment 
executed or issued, under o r in pursuance of any regulations or notifications 
repealed by these Regulations and any such thing, action, investigation, 
proceedings, order, appointment, conveyance, mortgage deed, document, 
agreement, fee, resolution, direction, proceedings or instrument shall if in force at 
the coming into force of these Regulations and not inconsistent with any of the 
provisions of these Re gulations, continue to b e in force, and have effect as if it 
were respectively done, taken, commenced, made , directed, passed , given, 
executed or issued under these Regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(39) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2741(40) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(41) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2741(42) THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 [PART II 
 
 
 
 
PART II] THE GAZETTE OF PAKISTAN, EXTRA., DECEMBER 5, 2020 2741(43) 
 
 
 
 [ID/PRDD/BANCASSURANCE/2020.] 
 
 
 
BILAL RASUL, 
Secretary to the Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, PRINTING CORPORATION OF PAKISTAN PRESS, ISLAMABAD. 
PUBLISHED BY THE DEPUTY CONTROLLER, STATIONERY AND FORMS, UNIVERSITY ROAD, KARACHI. 