Source: The Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (Floatation and Control) Ordinance, 1980 (XXXI of 1980), text at nasirlawsite.com/laws/modaraba.htm, read 25 September 2026.
 
 The Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (Floatation and Control) Ordinance,
1980 (Ordinance No. XXXI of 1980) 
 Federal Statute 
 Normal 
 Microsoft Windows 
 2 
 11 
 2004-04-05T05:24:00Z 
 2014-05-13T13:25:00Z 
 2014-05-13T13:25:00Z 
 1 
 4992 
 28455 
 Nasir Law Associates (Jurists' House) 
 237 
 66 
 33381 
 11.5606 
 0 
 0 
 false 
 false 
 false 
 MicrosoftInternetExplorer4 
 Updated:   DATE \@ "dddd MMMM dd, yyyy" Tuesday May 06, 2014 / 
DATE   \@ "dddd MMMM dd, yyyy"
\h   \* MERGEFORMAT AthThulatha
Rajab 07, 1435 / 
DATE   \@ "dddd MMMM dd, yyyy"
\s   \* MERGEFORMAT Mangalavara
Vaisakha 16, 1936 , at   DATE   \@
"hh:mm:ss am/pm"   \*
MERGEFORMAT 09:11:39 AM 
 The Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (Floatation and
Control) Ordinance, 1980 
 ORDINANCE XXXI OF 1980 
AN 
ORDINANCE 
 to
provide for matters relating to registration of modaraba companies and the
floatation, management and regulation of modarabas. 
 No. F.
17(1)/80-Pub.-The following Ordinances made by the President on the 26th June,
1980 are hereby published for general information:--- 
 WHEREAS
it is expedient to provide for matters relating to registration of modaraba
companies and the floatation, management and regulation of modarabas and for
matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto:--- 
 AND
WHEREAS the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it
necessary to take immediate action; 
 Now,
THEREFORE, in pursuance of the Proclamation of the fifth day of July, 1977,
read with the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1977 (C.M.L.A. Order No. 1 of
1977), and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the President
is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordinance:--- 
 PART 1 
PRELIMINARY 
 (1) Short title, extent and commencement. -(1) This Ordinance shall be called the
Modaraba Companies and Modaraba (Floatation and Control) Ordinance, 1980. 
 (2)
It extends to the whole of Pakistan . 
 (3)
It shall come into force at once. 
 2.
 Definition .-(1) In this Ordinance,
unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,--- 
 1 [(a) “Commission” means the Commission as defined in the
Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan Act, 1997 (XLII of 1997);] 
 2 [ (ab)] “Modaraba” means a business in which a person participates with
his money and another with his efforts or skill or both his efforts and skill
and shall include Unit Trusts and Mutual Funds by whatever name called; 
 (b)
“Modaraba Certificate” means a certificate of definite denomination issued to
the subscriber of the Modaraba acknowledging receipt of money subscribed by
him; 
 (c)
“modaraba company” means a company engaged in the business of floating and
managing modaraba; 
 (d)
“Modaraba Fund” means a fund raised through floatation of modaraba; 
 (e)
“Prescribed” means prescribed by rules; 
 (f)
“Registrar” means the Registrar appointed under section 3; 
 (g)
“rules” means rules made under this Ordinance; and 
 (h)
“Tribunal” means a Tribunal constituted under section 24. 
 (2)
All terms and expressions used but not defined in this Ordinance shall have the
same meaning as in Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913). 
 3.
 Appointment of Registrar. -The Federal
Government may, by notification in the official gazette, appoint a person to be
the Registrar for the purpose of this Ordinance. 
 PART II 
REGISTRATION OF MODARABA COMPANIES 
 4.
 No company to operate without registration. -No
modaraba company shall operate without registration with the Registrar. 
 5.
 Eligibility for registration .-(1)A
company shall be eligible for registration as a modaraba company if it fulfills
the following conditions, namely:--- 
 (a)
that it is registered under the Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), or is a body
corporate formed under any law in force and owned or controlled, whether
directly or through a company or corporation, by the Federal Government or a
Provincial Government; 
 (b)
that, being a company solely engaged in the flotation and management of
modaraba, it has a paid up capital of not less than 3 [ two
and a half million rupees]; 
 (c)
that none of its directors, officers or employees has been convicted of fraud
or breach of trust or of an offence involving moral turpitude; 
 (d)
that none of its directors, officers or employees has been adjudged an insolvent
or has suspended payment or has compounded with his creditors; 
 (e)that
its promoters are, in the opinion of the Registrar, persons of means and
integrity and have knowledge of matters which the company may have to deal with
as a modaraba company; and 
 (f)
that, being a company also engaged in business other than floatation and
management of modaraba, it has a paid up capital of such amount and of such
nature as may be prescribed. 
 6.
 Application for registration. -(1) A
company which is eligible for registration as a modaraba company may make an
application for registration to the Registrar in such form and with such
documents as may be prescribed. 
 (2)
The Registrar, if he is satisfied after such enquiry and after obtaining such
further information as he may consider necessary that the applicant is eligible
for registration and that it is in the public interest so to do, may grant
registration to such company on such conditions as he may deem fit. 
 (3)
In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred
by sub-section (2), such conditions may include:--- 
 (i)
investments to be made; 
 (ii)
information and returns to be furnished to the Registrar; 
 (iii)business
to be undertaken; and 
 (iv)
restriction on transfer of shares by promoters, sponsors or persons holding
controlling interest. 
 PART III 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO MODARABAS 
 7.
 Types of modaraba.- (1) Modaraba may
be of two descriptions:- 
 (i)
Multipurpose Modaraba.-That is to say a modaraba having more than one specific
purpose or objective. 
 (ii)
Specific purpose Modaraba.-That is to say a modaraba having one specific
purpose or objective. 
 &# (2)
 A modaraba may be either for a fixed
period or for an indefinite period. 
 8.
 Creation and maintenance of modaraba.- (1)
A modaraba company registered under section 4 shall apply to the Registrar, in
such form and with such documents as may be prescribed, for permission to float
modaraba. 
 2)
An application for floatation of modaraba shall be accompanied by a prospectus
which shall contain, inter alia , the following information, namely; 
 (i)
the name and type of the modaraba; 
 (ii)
the conditions and amounts of the modaraba to be floated and the division
thereof into Modaraba Certificates of fixed amount; 
 (iii)the
business scheme, prospectus and mode of distribution of profit; 
 (iv)
the amount to be subscribed by the modaraba company to the modaraba in its own
name supported by evidence about its ability to meet the commitment; 
 (v)
the form of the Modaraba Certificate; and 
 (vi)
such other matters as may be prescribed. 
 (3)
The application, the prospectus and the documents filed therewith shall be
authenticated by all the directors of the company. 
 9.
 Religious Board.- The Federal
Government shall, for the purpose of this Ordinance, constitute a Religious
Board which shall consist of such members and shall have such functions, terms
and conditions as may be prescribed. 
 10.
 Business of modaraba.- No modaraba
shall be a business which is opposed to the injunctions of Islam and the
Registrar shall not permit the floatation of a modaraba unless the Religious
Board has certified in writing that the modaraba is not a business opposed to
the injunctions of Islam. 
 11.
 Authorization.- The Registrar may,
after obtaining from the Religious Board a certificate to the effect mentioned
in section 10 and on being satisfied that it is in the public interest so to
do, grant a certificate in the prescribed form authorising the floatation of
modaraba on such conditions as he may deem fit, including conditions as to the
business to be undertaken, expenses relating to the management of the Modaraba
Fund, preservation of assets and other matters relating to the mode of
management and distribution of profits:--- 
 Provided
that, before issuing the certificate of authorization, the Registrar may
require the modaraba company to make such modifications, additions or omissions
in the prospectus as the Religious Board may have indicated or as he may deem
fit. 
 12.
 Modaraba to be a legal person.- (1) A
modaraba shall sue and be sued in its own name through the modaraba company. 
 (2)
The assets and liabilities of each modaraba shall be separate and distinct from
those of another modaraba as also from those of the modaraba company. 
 13.
 Conditions applicable to Modaraba.- (1)
No allotment of Modaraba Certificates shall be made unless a prospectus
approved by the Registrar has been issued and the minimum amount stated in the
prospectus to be the amount which must be raised in order to provide for the
business operations and expenses has been subscribed. 
 (2)
All moneys received from the applicants for Modaraba Certificates for a
modaraba shall be deposited and kept in a separate account in a scheduled bank
as defined in the State Bank of Pakistan Act, 1956 (XXXIII of 1956), until they
are refunded in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) or until it
is certified by the Registrar that Modaraba Certificates have been allotted in
an amount not less than the minimum amount referred to in sub-section (1). 
 (3)
If the subscription referred to in sub-section (1) has not been received by the
date specified in the prospectus, all moneys received from the applicants shall
be refunded to them within fifteen days of the said date and the modaraba
company and the directors thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to
repay the money which is not so refunded. 
 (4)
The modaraba company shall issue Modaraba Certificates within thirty days from
the date of allotment. 
 (5)
The modaraba company shall maintain a register of holders of Modaraba
Certificates in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 (6)
The modaraba company shall maintain separate bank account, funds, assets and
liabilities of each modaraba. 
 (7)
No modaraba shall be liable for the liabilities, or be entitled to benefit from
the assets, of any other modaraba or of the modaraba company. 
 (8)
A Modaraba Certificate shall be transferable in the manner provided for in the
prospectus of the modaraba. 
 14.
 Preparation and circulation of annual accounts,
reports, etc.- (1) The modaraba company shall, within six months from
the close of the accounting year of the modaraba, prepare and circulate to the
holders of modaraba certificates:--- 
 (i)
annual balance sheet and profit and loss account in such form and manner as may
be prescribed; 
 (ii)
a report of the auditor on the balance sheet and profit and loss account; 
 (iii)a
report by the modaraba company on the state of affairs, activities and business
prospects of the modaraba and the amount of profits to be distributed to the
certificate holders. 
 (2)
In addition to the documents referred to in sub-section (1) the modaraba
company shall furnish to the Registrar and to the holders of Modaraba
Certificates such reports, accounts and information as may be prescribed or as
the Registrar may, at any time by an order in writing, require. 
 (3)
The modaraba company shall submit five copies of the accounts, statements and
reports referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) to the Registrar simultaneously
with the circulation of these documents to the holders of Modaraba Certificates. 
 15.
 Audit of accounts.- (1)The accounts of
a modaraba shall be audited by an auditor who is a Chartered Accountant within
the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Ordinance, 1961 (X of 1961), appointed
by the modaraba company with the approval of the Registrar and such auditor
shall have the same powers, duties and liabilities as an auditor of a company
has under the Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), and such other powers, duties
and liabilities as are, or may be, provided in this Ordinance and the rules. 
 (2)
In addition to other matters, the auditors shall also state in his report
whether in his opinion the business conducted investments made and expenditure
incurred by the modaraba are in accordance with the objects, terms and
conditions of the modaraba. 
 16.
 Prohibition of false statement, etc.- No
modaraba company, director, officer, employee or agent or auditor thereof
shall, in any document, prospectus, report, return, accounts, information or
explanation required to be furnished in pursuance of this Ordinance or the
rules or in any application made under this Ordinance or the rules, make any
statement or give any information which he knows or has reasonable cause to
believe to be false or incorrect or omit any material fact therefrom. 
 17.
 Conditions applicable to modaraba company.- (1)
No modaraba company shall engage in any business which is of the same nature
and competes with the business carried on by a modaraba floated or controlled
by it. 
 (2)
No modaraba company or any of its directors or officers or their relatives
shall obtain loan, advance or credit from the funds of the modaraba or on the
security of the assets of the modaraba. 
 Explanation .-In this sub-section, “relative”, in
relation to a director or officer, means the spouse, brother or sister or any
of the lineal ascendants or descendants of the director or officer. 
 (3)
A modaraba company shall subscribe in each modaraba floated by it not less than
ten per cent of the total amount of Modaraba Certificates offered for
subscription. 
 18.
 Remuneration of modaraba company.- The
remuneration of a modaraba company in respect of a modaraba floated by it shall
be a fixed percentage of the net annual profits of the modaraba and shall not
exceed ten per cent of such net annual profits computed in the manner to be
prescribed. 
 19.
 Cancellation of registration.- (1)
Where the Registrar is of the opinion that a modaraba company has contravened
or has failed to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or the rules or
with any direction made or given thereunder, he may, if he considers necessary
in the public interest so to do, by order in writing:--- 
 (a)
cancel the registration of the modaraba company; and 
 (b)
remove the modaraba company from the management of the modaraba floated by it: 
 Provided
that no such order shall be made without giving the modaraba company an
opportunity of being heard. 
 (2)
The modaraba company removed from the management of a modaraba under clause (b)
of sub-section (1) shall not be entitled to or be paid any compensation or damages
for loss or termination of office. 
 (3)
A modaraba company removed from the management of a modaraba under clause (b)
of sub-section (1) shall not be entitled to float any modaraba. 
 (4)
A modaraba company aggrieved by an order of the Registrar under sub-section (1)
may prefer an appeal to the 4 [Commission] within thirty days of the
date of the order. 
 5 [(5) An appeal preferred under
sub-section (4) shall be disposed off by the 6 [Commission] after
giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard.] 
 20.
 Appointment of Administrator.- (1) If,--- 
 (a)
the Registrar, has reason to believe that a modaraba company has been
conducting the affairs of a modaraba in a manner prejudicial to the interest of
the modaraba or the holders of Modaraba Certificates or in a fraudulent or
unlawful manner or has committed a default in complying with the provisions of
this Ordinance or the rules or with any direction made or given thereunder or
any condition of the modaraba; 
 (b)
the registration of a modaraba company has been cancelled; or 
 (c)
any other modaraba under the management of the modaraba company has been
ordered to be wound up by the Tribunal, 
 the
Registrar, after affording the modaraba company an opportunity of being heard,
may, without prejudice to any other action under the law, by order in writing:--- 
 (i)
appoint an administrator to take over and manage the modaraba in place of the
modaraba company for such period as the Registrar may specify; or 
 (ii)
require the modaraba company to carry out such changes in the management and
procedure as may be specified; or 
 (iii)remove
the modaraba company and appoint another modaraba company in its place to
manage the modaraba. 
 (2)
The Registrar shall not make an order under sub-section (1) without the
approval of the 7 [Commission]. 
 21.
 Enquiries.- (1) The Registrar may, on
his own motion or on an application made by the holders of Modaraba
Certificates the value of which is not less than ten per cent of the total
subscribed amount of the modaraba, by an order in writing cause on enquiry to
be made by a person appointed by him in this behalf into the affairs of a
modaraba company or the modaraba or any business transaction thereof. 
 (2)
Where an enquiry under sub-section (1) has been ordered, every director,
manager or other officer of the modaraba company to which the enquiry relates
and every other person who has had any dealing with such modaraba company or
director or officer shall furnish such information or document in his custody
or power or within his knowledge relating to or having a bearing on the subject
matter of the enquiry as the person conducting the enquiry may by notice in
writing require. 
 (3)
The person conducting an enquiry under sub-section (1) may for the purpose of
such enquiry enter into any premises belonging to or in occupation of the
modaraba company or of the person to whom the enquiry relates and may call for,
inspect and seize books of accounts and documents in possession of any such
modaraba company, director, manager or any other officer or employee thereof. 
 (4)
The person holding an enquiry under sub-section (1) shall, for the purpose of
such enquiry, have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the
following matter, namely:--- 
 (a)
enforcing the attendance of a person and examining him on oath or affirmation; 
 (b)
compelling the discovery and production of documents; and 
 (c)
issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses. 
 (5)
On receipt of the report of the person conducting the enquiry, the Registrar
shall take such action as he may consider necessary on the basis of the report. 
 WINDING UP 
 22.
 Circumstances in which modaraba may be wound up
voluntarily.- (1) A modaraba floated for a fixed period or for a
specific purpose shall be wound up by the modaraba company itself on the expiry
of the period fixed for the modaraba or the accomplishment of the purpose of
the modaraba, as the case may be, provided the following conditions are
fulfilled, namely:--- 
 (a)
all the directors of the modaraba company shall make a declaration verified by
an affidavit to the effect that they have made a full enquiry about the affairs
of the modaraba and, having done so, have formed the opinion that the modaraba
will be able to discharge its liabilities, pay the amount subscribed by the
holders of Modaraba Certificates and all their other dues in full within a
period of twelve months from the date of expiry of the period fixed for the
modaraba or the accomplishment of the purpose of the modaraba, as the case may
be; 
 (b)
the declaration referred to in clause (a) shall be supported by a report of the
auditor of the modaraba on the affairs of the modaraba and shall have no effect
unless it is filed with and approved by the Registrar within ninety days of the
date of expiry of the period fixed for the modaraba or the accomplishment of
the purpose of the modaraba, as the case may be. 
 (2)
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) may prefer an appeal to the 8 [Commission] within thirty days of the day
on which the decision is given. 
 9 {(3) An appeal preferred under
sub-section (2) shall be disposed of by the 10 [Commission] after
giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard}. 
 23. Circumstances in which modaraba may be wound up by the
Tribunal.- (1) A modaraba shall be wound up by the Tribunal on an
application made by the Registrar if,--- 
 (i)
in the case of a modaraba for a fixed period on the expiry of that period or,
in the case of a modaraba for a specific purpose on the accomplishment of its
purpose, the declaration referred to in section 22 has not been filed with the
Registrar within the period specified in that section; 
 (ii)
in the case of any modaraba, the Registrar has declared that:--- 
 (a)
the modaraba is unable to discharge its liabilities; 
 (b)
the accumulated losses of the modaraba exceed fifty per cent of the total
amount subscribed by the holders of the Modaraba Certificates; or 
 (c)
the business of the modaraba is being or has been, conducted for a fraudulent
purpose or with intent to defraud the holders of the Modaraba Certificates, or
its creditors or any other person; 
 (iii)
the Tribunal is of opinion that it is just and equitable that the modaraba
should be wound up. 
 (2)
The Registrar may make an application to the Tribunal for the winding up of a
modaraba on receipt of an application under sub-section (1) of section 21 or of
the report of an enquiry under that section relating to the modaraba. 
 (3)
No application shall be made by the Registrar under sub-section (1) or (2)
without giving the modaraba company an opportunity of being heard. 
 24.
 Constitution of Tribunal.- (1) The
Federal Government may, by notification, in the official Gazette, constitute
one or more Tribunals for the purpose of this Ordinance and, where it
constitutes more than one Tribunal, shall specify in the notification the area
within which, or the class of cases in respect of which, each such Tribunal
shall exercise jurisdiction under this Ordinance .
 (2)
A Tribunal shall consist of a person who is, or has been, or is qualified to be
a judge of a High Court. 
 25. Powers of a Tribunal.- (1) A Tribunal shall,--- 
 (a)
in the exercise of its Civil jurisdiction, have in respect of a claim filed by
a holder of Modaraba Certificates against the modaraba company or by a modaraba
company against any other party with whom it has entered into business
transactions relating to Modaraba Fund, or in respect of an application by the
Registrar for the winding up of a modaraba company, all the powers vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908); 
 (b)
in the exercise of its criminal jurisdiction, try the offences punishable under
this Ordinance and shall, for that purpose, have the same powers as are vested
in the Court of a Sessions Judge under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898
(Act V of 1898):--- 
 Provided
that a Tribunal shall not take cognizance of any offence punishable under this
Ordinance except on a complaint in writing made by the Registrar or an officer
authorized by him in writing; and 
 (c)
exercise and perform such other powers and functions as are, or may be,
conferred upon or assigned to it by or under this Ordinance. 
 (2)
All proceedings before a Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of
1860), and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a court for the purposes of
sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898). 
 (3)
No court other than the Tribunal shall have or exercise any jurisdiction with
respect to any matter to which the jurisdiction of the Tribunal extends under
this Ordinance. 
 26.
 Procedure of the Tribunal.- (1)
Matters before the Tribunal shall come up for regular hearing as expeditiously
as possible and, except in extraordinary circumstances and on grounds to be
recorded, the Tribunal shall hear the cases from day to day. 
 (2)
In the exercise of its civil jurisdiction, the Tribunal shall, in all suits
before it, including suits for recovery of money, follow the summary procedure
Provided for in Order XXXVII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908). 
 27.
 Powers of Tribunal on hearing application for
winding up of modaraba.- (1) If, after hearing the application for
winding up of a modaraba, the Tribunal decides to wind up the same it shall
appoint a liquidator in consultation with the Registrar and approve a general
scheme of winding up. 
 (2)
After a winding up order has been passed by the Tribunal, the modaraba company
shall forthwith hand over charge of the modaraba to the liquidator and furnish
him with such statements, documents, records, information and other material as
may be required by him. 
 (3)
The liquidator shall conduct the winding up proceedings in the prescribed
manner under the control and directions of the Tribunal. 
 (4)
The winding up proceedings shall be completed within a period of one year from
the date of appointment of the liquidator, unless the Tribunal, for special
reasons to be recorded in writing, extends the period. 
 (5)
During the winding up proceedings, the Tribunal may allow the administrator
appointed by the Registrar under section 20, if any, to continue to function or
may appoint an administrator to manage the modaraba till the disposal of the
proceedings. 
 28. Judgement and decree.- (1) a Tribunal shall,
after the case has been heard, pronounce judgement as early as practicable and
on such judgement a decree shall follow forthwith. 
 (2)
The Tribunal shall, on the application of the decree-holder, forthwith order
execution of the decree:--- 
 Provided
that, if the decree is for money, the recovery in execution thereof shall be
made as arrears of land revenue. 
 29. Finality of orders.- Subject to the provisions
for appeal as provided in section 30, no court or other authority shall call or
permit to be called in question any order, judgement or sentence of the
Tribunal or the legality or propriety of anything done or intended to be done
by the Tribunal under this Ordinance. 
 30.
 Appeals.- (1) Any person aggrieved by
any order, judgement, decree or sentence of the Tribunal may, within thirty
days of such order, judgement, decree or sentence, prefer an appeal to the High
Court within whose jurisdiction the order, judgement, decree or sentence is
passed: 
 Provided
that no appeal shall lie from an interlocutory order which does not dispose of
the entire case before the Tribunal. 
 (2)
An appeal under sub-section(1) shall be heard by a Bench of two judges of the
High Court and shall lie on any one of the following grounds, namely:--- 
 (a)
the decision being contrary to law or to some usage having the force of law; or 
 (b)
the decision having failed to determine a material issue of law or usage having
the force of law; or 
 (c)
a substantial error apparent in the procedure provided by or under this
Ordinance, which may possibly have led to an error in the decision. 
 (3)
An appeal may be preferred under this section from a decision made ex-parte . 
 31.
 Punishment.- (1) Whoever contravenes
the provisions of section 4, 10, 13, 14, 16 or 17 shall be punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years
and with fine which may extend to five hundred thousand rupees. 
 (2)
Where, the contravention referred to in sub-section (1) has caused loss to the
modaraba or any other person, a further fine to the extent of the loss shall be
imposed. 
 32.
 Penalty.- 11 [(1)] if any
person,--- 
 (a)
refuses or fails to furnish any document, return or information which he is
required to furnish by or under this Ordinance; or 
 (b)
refuses or fails to comply with any condition imposed or made by the Federal
Government or direction made or given under this Ordinance or the rules; or 
 (c)
contravenes or otherwise fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance
or the rules other than those referred to in sub-section (1) of section 31, 
 the
Registrar, may, if he is satisfied, after giving the person an opportunity of
being heard, that the refusal, failure or contravention was willful, by order,
direct that such person shall pay to the Federal Government by way of penalty
such sum not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees as may be specified in the
order and, in the case of a continuing default, a further sum calculated at a
rate not exceeding one thousand rupees for every day after the issue of such
order during which the refusal, failure or contravention continues. 
 12 [(2)Any person aggrieved by an
order passed under sub-section (1) may, within sixty days of such order, prefer
an appeal to the Commission.] 
 33.
 Liability of director, manager or officer of a
company.- (1) Where the person guilty of an offence referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 31 or in section 32 is a company or other body
corporate, every director, manager, or other officer responsible for the
conduct of its affairs shall, unless he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge, or that he exercised all diligence to prevent its
commission, be deemed to be guilty of the offence. 
 (2)Any
sum directed to be paid under section 32 shall be recoverable as an arrear of
land revenue. 
 (3)
No prosecution for an offence against this Ordinance or the rules shall be
instituted in respect of the same facts on which a penalty has been imposed
under section 32. 
 34.
 Powers of the Registrar in relation to certain
Proceedings.- In any proceedings under section 32, the Registrar
shall have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely:--- 
 (a)
enforcing attendance of a person and examining him on oath or affirmation; and 
 (b)
compelling the discovery and production of documents. 
 35.
 Application of fine.- The Tribunal
imposing any fine under this Ordinance may direct that the whole or any part
thereof shall be applied in or towards,--- 
 (i)
payment of costs of the proceedings; 
 (ii)
payment to an aggrieved party of compensation for any loss caused by the
offence; 
 (iii)payment
of compensation for any loss mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 31. 
 36.
 Enforcement of provisions of the Ordinance,
etc.- (1) If a modaraba company makes default in complying with any
provisions of this Ordinance or a direction made or given under this Ordinance
and fails to make good the default within thirty days of the service of a
notice to the modaraba company requiring it to do so, the Tribunal may, on an
application made to the Tribunal by the Registrar, make an order directing the
modaraba company and any director or officer thereof to make good the default within
such period as may be specified in the order. 
 (2)
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prejudice the operation of any
provision of this Ordinance providing for the imposition of penalties on the
modaraba company or its directors and officers in respect of any such default
as aforesaid. 
 37.
 Exemption from tax.- The income of a
modaraba shall be exempt from tax under the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 (XXXI of
1979), if not less than ninety per cent of its profits in a year is distributed
to the holders of the Modaraba Certificates. 
 38.
 Power of Federal Government to exempt, etc.- The
Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, exempt from
the requirements of sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 17 a company or a body
corporate formed under any law and owned or controlled by the Federal
Government or a Provincial Government, whether directly or through a company or
corporation set up by such Government. 
 39.
 Delegation of Powers.- The Registrar
may, by notification in the official Gazette, delegate, subject to such
limitations, restrictions or conditions, if any, as he may, from time to time
specify, such of his powers and functions under this Ordinance as he may deem
fit to any officer subordinate to him. 
 40.
 Indemnity.- No suit, prosecution or
other legal proceeding shall lie against the Federal Government or the
Registrar or any other officer for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Ordinance or any rules. 
 41.
 Power to make rules.- (1) The Federal
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purpose of this Ordinance. 
 (2)
In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may include,--- 
 (i)
the duties and functions of the Registrar; 
 (ii)
terms and conditions of a Tribunal; 
 (iii)
procedure relating to a Tribunal; 
 (iv)
composition, terms and conditions of the Religious Board; 
 (v)
procedure relating to the Religious Board; 
 (vi)
form, contents and other requirements of a prospectus; 
 (vii)
issue and allotment of Modaraba Certificates; 
 (viii)
maintenance of modaraba accounts and funds; 
 (ix)
form of balance sheet and profit and loss account; 
 (x)
audit and auditor’s certificate; 
 (xi)
annual and periodical accounts and reports; 
 (xii)
inspection of record and supply of copies of documents; 
 (xiii)
matters relating to winding up; 
 (xiv)
matters and procedure relating to enquiries; 
 (xv)
charging and determination of fees payable under this Ordinance; and 
 (xvi)
such other matters as are to be or may be prescribed. 
 42.
 Act to override other laws.- The
provisions of this Ordinance shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained in the Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), or any other law for the
time being in force. 
 43.
 Removal of difficulties.- If any
difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this Ordinance, the
Federal Government may make such order, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Ordinance, as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of removing
the difficulty. 
 General, 
M. ZIA-UL-HAQ, 
President. 
 The Modaraba Companies and
Modaraba Rules, 1981 
 Go to Index 
| LL. B. – I | LL. B. – II 
| LL. B. – III | LL. B.
Directory | Home 
