 TASDEEQ - Pakistan’s First SBP Licensed Credit Bureau Skip to content Pakistan’s First SBP Licensed Credit Bureau Menu Business Personal TASDEEQ App Liquidated Loan Recovery Menu About us We Are TASDEEQ Our Core Values Our Leadership Products & Services TASDEEQ App Credit Information Report Alerts Dashboard Credit Score Barometer Dashboard Industry and Business Portfolio Analytics Recovery Assistance Service CIR Plus Portfolio Scrub/Review Credit Education Careers Contact Us Investor Relations Financial Reports Prospectus Get your credit report & score Business Personal Liquidated Loan Recovery Menu About us We Are TASDEEQ Our Core Values Our Leadership Products & Services TASDEEQ App Credit Information Report Alerts Dashboard Credit Score Barometer Dashboard Industry and Business Portfolio Analytics Recovery Assistance Service CIR Plus Portfolio Scrub/Review Credit Education Careers Contact Us Investor Relations Financial Reports Prospectus Get your credit report & score Know your Credit History, anytime! With TASDEEQ App , your credit report and score are just a tap away. Download Now TASDEEQ APP Download now and monitor your credit score and report on-the-go Be Future Ready: With TASDEEQ’s advanced data driven solutions Make better decisions through our innovative products and services that provide meaningful insights and promote financial inclusion. Talk to us to Become a Member Mitigate Risk, Enhance your Business and Acquire more Customers with TASDEEQ Our innovative approach to data, technology and advanced analytics drives insights that enable you to make quick decisions with confidence. Talk to us to Become a Member Services We Offer Gain valuable insights into your customers' financial health with TASDEEQ's comprehensive credit solutions. Our range of services, including credit reporting, monitoring, and data analytics, equips businesses with the tools they need for informed decision-making. Assess creditworthiness, manage risk, and drive business growth with TASDEEQ. CIR Report Basic regulatory requirement to make credit evaluations easier for lending institutions Learn More Alerts Dashboard Track risk status of customers through an interactive dashboard Learn More Credit Score Make timely and data-driven decisions on credit disbursements Learn More Barometer Dashboard User MFP’s comparison with the rest of the industry based on KPIs Learn More Industry and Business Portfolio Analytics Benchmark your portfolio against market trends using TASDEEQ's ecosystem-wide credit... Learn More Recovery Assistance Service Boost recovery rates with updated borrower contact information Learn More CIR Plus Report Provides you with the information to determine the household’s overall indebtedness Learn More Portfolio Scrub / Review Flagged for limit enhancements, cross-product offerings and defaults Learn More Member Status We are growing every day, with members from banking and financial institutions across Pakistan providing insights on 18 million records. Overall TASDEEQ Database 100% 0 Total Number 0 M Borrowers Commercial Banks 100% 0 Total Number 0 M Borrowers 0 Y Average History Microfinance Banks 100% 0 Total Number 0 M Borrowers 0 Y Average History Microfinance Institutions 100% 0 Total Number 0 M Borrowers 0 Y Average History NBFCs & Other Members 100% 0 Total Number 0 M Borrowers 0 Y Average History Note: There are 13M Overlapping Borrowers among the above Financial Institution Types. Become a Member Our members have access to consumer Credit information Reports (CIR), Credit Scores and other innovative services that make lending easier. Talk to us to Become a Member Latest News Browse latest news and customer events TASDEEQ took the stage at Pakistan Startup Summit 2024 organized by SECP × November 2024 TASDEEQ took the stage at Pakistan Startup Summit 2024 organized by SECP TASDEEQ proudly participated in the Pakistan Startup Summit 2024, organized by SECP, alongside industry leaders such as JazzCash, Haball, & Kistpay. The panel delved into the theme, “Unlocking Big Data’s Potential: From Insight to Innovation in Business and Tech.” The discussion centered on striking the delicate balance between harnessing data for growth and managing associated risks, emphasizing the critical importance of robust data protection in today’s digital era. Each leader shared invaluable insights from their experiences, showcasing how data drives smarter decision-making, fosters innovation, and builds trust. Close Tasdeeq team attended a session on "Mobilizing Funds from Capital Markets to Achieve Sustainable Development Goals" at the Pakistan Stock Exchange Limited × October 2024 Tasdeeq team attended a session on "Mobilizing Funds from Capital Markets to Achieve Sustainable Development Goals" at the Pakistan Stock Exchange Limited Our 𝗖𝗘𝗢, 𝗠𝗿. 𝗠𝘂𝗺𝘁𝗮𝘇 𝗦𝘆𝗲𝗱, had the privilege of joining esteemed speakers from Mobilink Microfinance Bank Limited, World Bank Pakistan, The Bank of Punjab, and Kashf Foundation. During the session, he shared his valuable perspectives on listing microfinance providers on the Pakistan Stock Exchange to boost liquidity and drive growth. He emphasized prioritizing larger microfinance providers as a strategic step to pave the way for others in the sector. Close TASDEEQ took part in Annual Microfinance Conference AMC8, hosted by the Pakistan Microfinance Network. × October 2024 TASDEEQ took part in Annual Microfinance Conference AMC8, hosted by the Pakistan Microfinance Network. TASDEEQ proudly participated in the Annual Microfinance Conference 2024, marking the dawn of a transformative era in microfinance! This dynamic event celebrates innovation as a catalyst for meaningful change. Close Read More Follow Us Facebook-f Linkedin-in Want to know more how we help businesses through data and insights? Contact Us 042-111-900-900 info@tasdeeq.com Follow Us Facebook-f Linkedin-in Instagram Quick Links Home About Credit Education Members News and Events FAQS Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Latest News TASDEEQ Leadership Meets Surfin, A Global Fintech Platform TASDEEQ Signs Strategic MoU with GOLD LIONS FINANCIALS to Advance Pakistan’s Financial Ecosystem Toll Free 0800-88008 Complaints complaints@secp.gov.pk Queries queries@secp.gov.pk Service Desk Copyright © by 2026 TASDEEQ. All Rights Reserved. 